Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
Available online 27 February 2023
1566-1199/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Cycling stability of organic electrochemical transistors 
Miao Xie a,1, Huifang Liu b,*,1, Mengge Wu c, Cong Chen a, Jinjie Wen a, Libing Bai a, 
Junsheng Yu c, Wei Huang a,** 
a School of Automation Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, Sichuan, 611731, PR China 
b Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences and Sichuan Provincial People’s Hospital, School of Medicine, UESTC, Chengdu, 
611731, Sichuan, PR China 
c School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, UESTC, Chengdu, Sichuan, 611731, PR China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Organic electrochemical transistors 
Cycling stability 
Biosensors 
Mixed ionic-electronic semiconductors 
Microstructure 
A B S T R A C T   
In recent years, organic electrochemical transistors, which possess low driving voltage (<1 V), high trans­
conductance (>10 mS), and mechanical robustness, have gained tremendous research interest in the area of 
bioelectronics, where low power dissipation, decent sensitivity, and biocompatibility are vital. These advantages 
are attributed to the novel mixed ionic-electronic (semi)conductors, where their electrical conductance can be 
effectively modulated through the bulk doping/dedoping process by the ions from the electrolyte dielectric. 
However, this process would irreversibly affect the micro/nano structures and/or chemical formula of the 
semiconductors, thus resulting in inferior cycling stability when compared to other transistor techniques. In this 
review, mechanisms on how the micro/nano structures and chemical formulas are influenced by the doping/ 
dedoping process, are systematically summarized, followed by the presentation of state-of-the-art high-perfor­
mance OECTs with decent cycling stabilities. Last, future perspectives on OECTs are provided, focusing on 
possible strategies to enhance cycling stability.   
1. Introduction 
Even though first invented in the mid-1980s [1], organic electro­
chemical transistors (OECTs) just received extensive research attention 
in recent years due to the rapid development of advanced organic mixed 
ionic-electronic (semi)conductors (OMIECs) [2,3]. Compared with 
typical field effect transistors (FETs), where the transistor channel is 
accumulated only at the interface of semiconductor and dielectric, 
OECTs possess a transistor channel where the ions from the electrolyte 
can dope/dedope the bulk of the (semi)conductor [4–6]. Notably, this 
kind of phenomenon benefits from OMIECs as the channel material 
along with electrolytes as the dielectric. Therefore, under the gate bias, 
ions from the electrolyte can inject into the channel bulk, forming high 
area capacitance as high as 104 μF/cm2 [7], further changing the doping 
state of the channel, and modulating the drain current (ID). Conse­
quently, small changes in gate voltage (VG) (<1 V) can lead to large 
modulations in ID, which makes OECTs possess high transconductance 
(gm = ΔID/ΔVG) of more than mS scale [8,9]. Besides, the structural 
flexibility and biocompatibility of OECTs make them receive substantial 
research attention in the field of bioelectronics such as electrophysi­
ology signal recording [10–13], neural interfacing [14,15], and cell 
monitoring [16–18]. Therefore, OECTs show tremendous advantages in 
biochemical signals detecting/sensing, such as Na+, K+, glucose, and 
lactate [19–23]. For instance, ion-selective OECTs that can monitor NH4
+
and Ca2+ from human sweat simultaneously with high sensitivity and 
selectivity during physical exercise have been developed [24]. 
Furthermore, OECTs can also effectively monitor the electrophysiolog­
ical signals of organs, tissues, and cells [25–27]. For example, by using 
flexible OECT arrays with decent flexibility and excellent transfer 
characteristics, cardiac action potentials of cardiomyocyte-like HL-1 
cells have been monitored with high signal-to-noise [28]. 
Nowadays, research on OECTs mainly focuses on novel OMIEC 
synthesis [29]. While poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with 
poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is the most widely employed 
channel material in OECTs, due to its commercial availability, charge 
storage/transport capability, and biocompatibility. Up to now, the 
* Corresponding author. 
** Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: liuhuifang@med.uestc.edu.cn (H. Liu), whuang@uestc.edu.cn (W. Huang).   
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Organic Electronics 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/orgel 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2023.106777 
Received 4 December 2022; Received in revised form 6 February 2023; Accepted 24 February 2023   

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
2
polythiophene system has been further expanded, with outstanding 
development in high-performance p-type materials, including p(g2T-T) 
[30], p(g2T-TT) [31], and p(g2T2-g4T2) [32]. These thiophene-based 
conjugated polymers have superior properties over PEDOT:PSS in 
terms 
of 
gm, 
stability, 
processability, 
etc 
[33]. 
Although 
high-performance p-type OMIECs have been intensively applied as the 
channel materials of OECTs, the development of corresponding n-type 
OMIECs still lags greatly behind in terms of mobility and stability. 
Several n-type OMIECs with enhanced performance have been devel­
oped recently [34–36]. For example, p(gNDI-gT2) as one of the first 
n-type polymer-based OMIECs [37], showed relatively good stability 
during pulse measurements over 2 h (~720 cycles). Additionally, as one 
unique type of n-type OMIECs, poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) 
(BBL) is a ladder-type polymer with high rigidity and planarity of the 
π-conjugated polymer backbone, leading to a high electron affinity (EA) 
of 4.0 eV [38,39]. Moreover, this advantageous structure leads to high 
volume capacitance (C*), and OECTs based on BBL show high gm (up to 
9.7 mS) and excellent stability in ambient and aqueous media (vide infra) 
[40]. However, compared with p-type OECTs, n-type OECTs still show 
lower electron mobility and gm, and inadequate cycling stability in 
different electrolytes [35,41]. The low n-type OECT performance, 
especially the mismatch between n-type and p-type OECTs, hampers the 
realization of complementary logic circuits and related applications in 
the area of biosensing, human/machine interface, and artificial neuro­
morphic devices. 
In addition to the above-mentioned achievements and under- 
development aspects, stability [42], especially cycling stability, is one 
key fact that determines the further commercialization of OECTs in any 
application area. As mentioned above, the high performance of OECT is 
based on the OMIECs where ions from the electrolyte can inject into 
their bulk. During this process, OMIECs experience complex redox 
processes and swelling, which is ideally fully reversible. However, in 
reality, side reactions and permanent micro/nano structure changes are 
observed in most of the research and would result in performance 
degradation after multiple cycling tests. Note, the cycling test of an 
OECT typically refers to the ID - t characteristic under the bias of a square 
wave of VG and a constant drain voltage (VD). The low and high voltage 
levels in the square wave of VG are typically determined by the VGs 
where the OECT is turned off and turned on, respectively. Such cycling 
test would lead to repeated redox process (ie, ion doping and dedoping 
process) and accelerate the aging of the OECT. Therefore, if irreversible 
reactions and structure variations are introduced, a change in ID would 
be observed in the cycling test. In early publications on OECTs, limited 
information is provided regarding cycling stability, even though reviews 
on OECTs have been published extensively [2,4,29,41,43–49]. While 
with the development of novel OMIECs holding better stabilities, cycling 
tests are conducted more frequently. 
However, OECTs with both high and ultra-stable performance are 
still rare, especially for n-type ones. To make the commercialization of 
OECTs one step closer, strategies for the design and fabrication of OECTs 
and OMIECs with decent stability are essential. Moreover, an evaluation 
standard regarding how cycling stability should be conducted and 
analyzed is still missing. In this review, to summarize the current 
knowledge on the cycling stability of OECT, the degradation mechanism 
is first discussed based on the working principle of OECT, especially on 
the electrochemical redox reaction process. Then, OECTs with enhanced 
cycling stabilities are summarized based on material advancement, ad­
ditive engineering, etc. Last, future directions for stable OECTs are 
concluded. 
2. Degradation mechanism of OECTs 
To achieve OECTs with high cycling stability, full and deep recog­
nition of the working mechanism of this kind of device is the precon­
dition. OECTs share a similar structure to that of organic thin-film 
transistors (OTFTs), which consist of three electrodes (source, drain, and 
gate), an organic channel layer between the source/drain electrodes, 
along with a dielectric (Fig. 1a) [50]. Same as that in typical transistors, 
OECTs can be viewed as a switch and an amplifier, in which the input 
signal (VG), controls and amplifies the output signal (ID). Similarly, 
OECTs can operate in either depletion or accumulation mode, depending 
on the choice of channel materials. As shown in Fig. 1b, in p-type 
depletion mode OECTs, the channel material is intrinsically conductive 
and typically self-doped when no VG is applied or at VG = 0 V. While the 
application of a positive VG switches the transistor from ON state to OFF 
state. Conversely, for p-type accumulation mode OECTs, the channel 
material is poorly conductive when no VG is applied or at VG = 0 V, and it 
turns to a conductive state when a negative VG is applied. Note, most of 
the OECTs reported so far work in depletion mode, due to the ubiquitous 
utilization of PEDOT:PSS, which is p-type self-doped and commercially 
available. 
Here, the operating process of a depletion mode OECT is elucidated 
using the PEDOT:PSS channel as an example. In the absence of a VG or at 
VG = 0 V, PEDOT:PSS based channel holds high hole carrier density due 
to the self-doping of PSS. Therefore, VD would lead to an apparent 
current flow (ID) from the source electrode to the drain electrode 
through the channel, and the transistor is under the ON state. Once a 
large enough positive VG is applied, cations in the electrolyte will be 
pushed to the interface of the electrolyte/channel and injected into the 
channel bulk. Consequently, the cations would gradually charge balance 
the PSS anions and de-dope the PEDOT backbone, leading to decreased 
hole carrier density and ID (OFF state) (Fig. 1b, blue curve). In contrast, 
p-type accumulation-mode OECTs are normally in the OFF state when 
VG = 0 V, owing to the low intrinsic hole carrier concentration. A 
negative VG would lead to the injection of anions into the channel bulk 
and thus a corresponding accumulation of holes, leading to dramatically 
enhanced ID (ON state) (Fig. 1b, red curve) [31,51]. 
As illustrated above, the successful operation of OECTs relies on both 
ionic and electronic conduction in OMIECs. Therefore, OMIECs are core 
components of OECTs, where both the transport of charge carriers 
within the polymer and the diffusion of ions through the electrolyte/ 
OMIEC interface and in OMIEC bulk, influence the device functionality. 
Even though the performance of OECTs, especially gm, relies simulta­
neously on ion diffusion and carrier transport, this would also introduce 
micro/nano structure problems, which could irreversibly affect long- 
term stability. Specifically, considering that current modulation occurs 
as a result of ions penetrating into the bulk of channel material, while 
ions [especially cations and anions dissolved in water typically have 
hydration shell(s)] share much larger radius when compared with 
atoms/electrons, the diffusion of these ions in the bulk of OMIECs would 
cause obvious change on the micro/nano structure. Consequently, dur­
ing the doping/dedoping process, the repeated dynamic swelling of 
OMIEC would continuously deteriorate its micro/nano structure. 
Therefore, reported OECTs rarely show stable cycling stabilities higher 
than 10,000 cycles [23]. 
To date, however, the sources and mechanisms of OECT degradation 
have not been rigorously and systematically explored. Many researches 
have revealed that electronic transport characteristics, including sta­
bility, in hydrated polymer systems, is accounted for the interactions 
between polymer, polymer morphology, solvent (water in the case of 
bioelectronics), and dopant (ion species in the electrolyte) [52,53]. A 
classical study, conducted by Flagg et al., uncovered the effects of 
various potassium salts with different anions, including F−, Cl−, Br−, 
ClO4
−, PF6
−and TFSI−, on the mixed ionic/electronic transport properties 
of OECTs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) [54]. It was 
found that the anion type affects both ID and threshold voltage (VT), 
where “larger” molecular anions result in lower VTs and greater IDs 
(Fig. 2a). Using spectroelectrochemistry and coulometry, a similar trend 
can be observed that higher doping levels can be achieved with “larger” 
anions like PF−and TFSI−compared to Cl−and ClO4
−. Moreover, the 
mobility of the hole carriers within the film was found to be 
anion-dependent (Fig. 2b), especially at low doping levels. By further 
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
3
investigating the system using in situ gravimetric measurements with an 
electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance, it is found that ion chem­
istry has a dramatic impact on solvation during uptake, where small ions 
(Cl−and ClO4
−) bring in ~10 solvent molecules due to the formation of 
hydration shell(s), while larger polyatomic anions can enter into the film 
with fewer or no waters. This partly explains why larger ions (radius 
without hydration shell) can dope more efficiently and show higher hole 
mobilities. 
Flagg et al. further investigated the mechanism of ion-dependent 
charge compensation during electrochemical doping of an OMIEC 
[poly(3-{[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]methyl}thiophene-2,5-diyl) 
(P3MEEMT)] [55]. By applying electrochemical quartz microbalance 
gravimetry together with glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy, 
it was observed that charge doping/dedoping processes depend on 
cation and anion species. Therefore, the doping mechanism of 
P3MEEMT in 20 mM KPF6 is proposed based on varying biasing voltage 
(Fig. 2c): First, dramatic swelling is observed when the film only makes 
contact with the electrolyte due to hydration, where both cations and 
anions also diffuse into the film. Then, when applying an oxidative bias 
(a negative bias, −300 mV, at the Ag/AgCl electrode), holes will be 
injected into the film due to the ejection of cations. In the meantime, 
most of the solvent would also be extracted. When the oxidative bias 
further increases to −600 mV, the cation will be fully depleted, which, 
on the other hand, would induce the injection of anions into the film. At 
last, all the cations will be ejected from the film, and the film become 
rich in hole concentration due to the injection of anions. Note, dedoping 
follows this same process in a reversed manner. It is concluded that the 
expulsion of cations can be the underlying mechanism that provides the 
initial charge compensation in some p-type OMIECs, indicating that the 
cations and anions are not always inactive in p-type and n-type OMIECs, 
respectively. 
Not only the ion species but also the structure of OMIECs would 
affect the OECT performance exclusively. For instance, two polymers, 
P3MEEMT and P3HT, which share the same backbone (polythiophene) 
but different side chains [P3MEEMT and P3HT possess ethylene glycol 
(EG)-based and alkyl-based side chains, respectively] show distinct 
transistor characteristics [56]. Fig. 2d shows how the absorption spec­
trum changes over time with electrochemical doping using spec­
troelectrochemistry for P3HT and P3MEEMT with either Cl−or PF6
−as 
the anion (VG = 0.7 V and 0.5 s between spectra). For both P3MEEMT 
and P3HT, using PF6
−as the anion results in a larger decrease in the main 
absorption peak and a larger increase in the polaron peak, indicating a 
higher degree of doping compared to using Cl−. Additionally, doping 
kinetics in P3MEEMT with both anions is approximately 150 times faster 
than those of P3HT. Spectroelectrochemical measurement suggests that 
the speed of electrochemical doping depends strongly on the side-chain 
chemistry when using either 100 mM KCl or KPF6 aqueous solutions. 
The ethylene glycol-based side chains allow ions to inject much faster 
into the film than alkyl side chains, presumably because of the hydro­
philic and ion-conducting nature of ethylene glycol side chains. By 
characterizing these two films under dry conditions or in water through 
grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD), it was found that the lattice 
of P3MEEMT expanded readily in solution to accommodate water and 
ions. On the contrary, the P3HT lattice did not expand spontaneously in 
Fig. 1. (a) Typical structure of an OECT, where the gate electrode is an Ag/AgCl electrode. (b) Representative transfer curves of depletion mode (blue) and 
accumulation mode (red) OECTs, respectively. 
Fig. 2. (a) Representative transfer curves of P3HT 
OECTs based on six different electrolytes. (b) Average 
mobilities as a function of doping density for P3HT 
films electrochemically doped by four different po­
tassium salts. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref. [54]. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Soci­
ety. (c) Scheme illustrating the mechanism of the 
electrochemical doping process in P3MEEMT with 
KPF6 under different voltage biases. Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [55]. Copyright 2020, American 
Chemical Society. (d) UV–vis spectra of P3HT and 
P3MEEMT upon electrochemical doping at 0.7 V in 
100 mM solutions of KCl and KPF6. The main ab­
sorption peak decreases with increased doping levels, 
and the polaron peak grows in accordingly. (e) 
Schematic depicting structural changes in P3HT and 
P3MEEMT in solution and upon electrochemical 
doping. (f) Schematic illustrating the charge carrier 
migration in annealed and unannealed P3MEEMT 
films, respectively, under different conditions. 
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [56]. Copyright 
2019, American Chemical Society.   
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
4
water and expanded only upon electrochemical doping (Fig. 2e). In 
P3MEEMT, the lattice was already expanded and the crystalline regions 
were hydrated, making the ion doping kinetics much faster. While for 
P3HT, the anions have to be injected into the polymer from the elec­
trolyte and displace the hydrophobic side chains when a potential is 
applied, thus P3HT exhibits much slower ion injections kinetics 
(Fig. 2d). In addition, compared with unannealed films, annealed 
P3MEEMT show higher mobility measured in the dry state in an organic 
field effect transistor configuration due to better crystallinity. When the 
film is hydrated, the unannealed one expanded more as it took up more 
water. Moreover, when a similar amount of charges are doped in the 
annealed and unannealed films under the bias of VG, higher mobility 
(0.19 ± 0.05 cm2/Vs) is achieved in the unannealed film compared to its 
annealed counterpart (0.13 ± 0.04 cm2/Vs) in OECT measurements 
(Fig. 2f). It was hypothesized that the change in mobility is attributed to 
the remaining water in the film bulk, which hinders the formation of a 
relatively rich electron transport path in the polymer film. While for the 
annealed film, the decreased mobility was attributed to the tremendous 
swelling effect of amorphous regions, which connected the crystalline 
regions of the film. Therefore, when the film was hydrated, this het­
erogeneity during swelling would prevent charge carriers from moving 
in between the crystalline regions. On the other hand, the unannealed 
film was less affected by the same factor due to homogeneity during 
swelling. This indicates that the presence of water can be a double-edged 
sword for OECT operation: on one hand, readily hydrated crystal lattices 
can facilitate ion transport, allowing for faster anion injection and better 
access for anions in tightly packed crystalline regions; on the other hand, 
polymer hydration can also interrupt the connectivity between crystal­
line regions of the polymer, significantly decreasing the carrier mobility. 
Therefore, swelling is considered to be essential for efficient ion in­
jection and transport [57], while the water taken up by the film during 
device operation and its effects on device performance are often ignored. 
Savva et al. investigated the impact of water on the electrochemical 
behavior of poly(2-(3,3′-bis(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)-[2, 
2′-bithiophen]-5-yl) thieno [3, 2-b] thiophene) [p(g2T-TT)] in NaCl 
aqueous solutions with various salt concentrations [58]. By collecting 
ex-situ grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) patterns 
of thin films electrochemically doped in 1 M and 10 mM NaCl aqueous 
solutions (Fig. 3a), respectively, it was found that the crystallites in the 
polymer experienced a unit cell distortion. The majority of water uptake 
occurred in the amorphous regions of the polymer and the water could 
be residing in the polymer even when it was reduced. As shown in 
Fig. 3b, when the OECT is operated in low-concentration NaCl aqueous 
solutions, more water is dragged in the film causing the channel to swell 
more 
and 
become 
softer 
compared 
with 
when 
doping 
in 
high-concentration electrolytes. It is noteworthy that, the swelling is not 
uniform throughout the bulk, where water interacts mainly with the side 
chains and localizes in chain interstitial spaces, and excess water uptake 
by these regions irreversibly disrupts the overall structural order. 
Based on the research results on the relation of electrolyte and side 
chains of OMIECs, it is obvious that side chain engineering of OMIECs 
could be an effective way to modulate the electrochemical doping pro­
cess. Szumska et al. studied the electrochemical redox activity of con­
jugated polymers based on naphthalene tetracarboxylic diimide and 
bithiophene (NDI-T2) donor-acceptor units with hydrophilic side 
chains. Based on this, side-chain engineering is demonstrated to be 
extremely important in improving the redox activity and stability when 
operated as the channel of OECTs under low oxygen concentrations 
[59]. Specifically, a series of polymers based on 3,3′-dialkoxy(tri­
ethylene glycol)bithiophene (g3T2) and naphthalenetetracarboxylic 
diimide (NDI) units with varying ratios of hydrophilic to hydrophobic 
side chains are synthesized to evaluate the impact of side chain substi­
tution on the electrochemical stability of the polymer in aqueous elec­
trolytes (Fig. 3c). By adopting quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), 
atomic 
force 
microscopy 
(AFM), 
electrochemical, 
spectroelec­
trochemical measurements, and density functional theory calculations, 
it was found that significantly suppression of the swelling effect can be 
achieved by introducing a small fraction of hydrophobic side chains, and 
further improve the electrochemical stability of polymer during 
continuous cycling in aqueous electrolytes. As shown in Fig. 3d, it is 
suggested that the physical interaction of the polymer chains would be 
disrupted by the uncontrolled swelling and further prevents the trans­
formation from the single to double charged states. A strong correlation 
is observed between the charging degree of the repeat units and the 
volume of the injected electrolyte, where more electrolyte uptake would 
lead to more severe microstructure variation. For instance, additional 
water would be introduced in the bulk of the film due to the formation of 
a hydration shell in an aqueous electrolyte and result in inferior elec­
trochemical stability during cycling. This study demonstrates that 
swelling of the polymers can be controlled by chemical design and 
greatly enhance the redox performance and stability of the 
electron-transporting polymers. 
Except for the swelling effect, which would lead to irreversible 
micro/nano structure degradation, the electrochemical redox process 
can also result in changes in the chemical formula of OMIECs or generate 
side products [60]. The ion doping/dedoping process of OMIECs can be 
Fig. 3. (a) Out-of-plane (qz) and in-plane (qxy) X-ray 
scattering linecuts for the (200) and (010) peaks, 
respectively, of p(g2T-TT) films doped with 10 mM 
NaCl(aq) (black lines) and 1 M NaCl(aq) (green lines). 
Numbers in parentheses correspond to different con­
ditions of the polymer: (1) dry, as-cast, (2) immersed 
in the electrolyte, (3) doped at 0.5 V vs open circuit 
voltage (VOC), and (4) subsequently dedoped at VOC 
of 0 V. (b) Schematic representation of an OECT 
channel composed pf p(g2T-TT) and gated with an 
Ag/AgCl electrode immersed in NaCl(aq) solutions 
with different ion concentrations. Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [58]. Copyright 2019, American 
Chemical Society. (c) Chemical structures of p 
([100:0]NDI-T2), 
p([100:0]NDI-g3T2), 
p([90:10] 
NDI-g3T2/T2), 
p([90:10]NDI-g3T2/T2), 
and 
p 
([75:25]NDI-g3T2). (d) Illustration of the charging 
mechanism of redox-active polymers with controlled 
water uptake and uncontrolled water uptake to the 
electron-polaron and electron bipolaronic state. 
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [59]. Copyright 
2021, American Chemical Society.   
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
5
described as a capacitive faradaic charging/discharging process [61], 
while stable electrochemical redox of OMIECs can be achieved when 
reversible capacitive faradaic charging/discharging occurs in the 
absence of non-capacitive faradaic side-reactions. However, in reality, 
these side reactions are hard to be avoided, which can yield products 
that may affect the electrochemical performance of OECTs. One example 
of non-capacitive faradaic reactions is the electron-transfer reaction 
from OMIEC to molecular oxygen, also called oxygen reduction (ORR). 
Depending on whether the reaction occurs through a two-electron pro­
cess [62] or a four-electron process [63,64], the ORR yields either H2O2 
or water (H2O) (Fig. 4b). The formation of H2O2 is a concern when the 
device is operated in a biological environment, due to possible active 
material corrodent or lipid peroxidation. To avoid this issue, Giovannitti 
et al. developed OMIECs based on donor-acceptor copolymers, p 
(gPyDPP-T2) 
and 
p(gPyDPP-MeOT2) 
(Fig. 
4a), 
where 
p 
(gPyDPP-MeOT2) has a deep ionization potential [IP, 5.3 eV when 
measured by photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) in air, and 5.5 eV when 
measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV)], thus shifting the operational 
voltage (the operational voltage here refers to the amplitude of VG) of 
the OECT to ≤−0.7 V. Therefore, no ORR occurs under such operational 
voltage in ambient conditions with pH neutral aqueous electrolytes 
[65]. While for p(gPyDPP-T2), due to a shallower IP of 5.0 eV (measured 
by both PES and CV), low electrochemical redox stability in water-based 
electrolytes is presented. By comparing the orbital and charge distri­
bution along the polymer chain, it was concluded that the MeOT2-unit 
provided more localized wavefunction for the hole polaron than the 
T2-unit, and was therefore expected to further stabilize the hole polaron, 
thereby increasing the redox stability of the copolymer. Moreover, by 
utilizing Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and X-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), it was found that degradation was 
mostly occurring on the DPP unit. Furthermore, OECTs based on p 
(gPyDPP-MeOT2) shows good stability under long-term cycling test 
and continuous charging conditions, with no or little change in the ON 
current after 400 cycles under the highest VG of −0.5 V, while a decrease 
of 8% and 16% is observed under higher VG of −0.6 V and −0.7 V, 
respectively (Fig. 4c). However, devices based on p(gPyDPP-T2) shows 
low device stability during pulsed-cycling tests (Fig. 4d). Carrying out a 
set of experiments on PEDOT:PSS, p(g2T-TT) and p(gPyDPP-MeOT2), by 
adopting ultraviolet–visible absorption spectroscopy (UV–vis), CV, 
rotating ring-disk electrode measurements, and enzymatic reaction, it 
was found that de-doped thin films of PEDOT:PSS and p(g2T-TT) un­
dergo spontaneous ORR and produce H2O2 when immersed in 0.1 M 
NaCl aqueous electrolyte under ambient conditions. Conversely, p 
(gPyDPP-MeOT2) does not undergo ORR, with no H2O2 formed during 
device operation. These results indicate that the oxidation potential of a 
polymer relative to the reference electrode is the key factor that de­
termines the possibility of the polymer being oxidized and forming 
H2O2. This finding highlights that by designing OMIECs with IP ≥4.9 
eV, non-capacitive faradaic side reactions can be avoided and the for­
mation of reactive side-products such as H2O2 can be prevented. 
Fig. 4. (a) Chemical structures of the p(gPyDPP-T2) 
and p(gPyDPP-MeOT2). (b) Schematic relating the 
energy levels of the indicated OMIECs. Cycling sta­
bility of OECT based on (c) p(gPyDPP-MeOT2) (VG =
0 to −0.5 V, −0.6 V, and −0.7 V) and (d) p(gPyDPP- 
T2) (VG = 0 to −1 V), respectively. Reprinted with 
permission 
from 
Ref. 
[65]. 
Copyright 
2020, 
WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
(e) Illustrations of an OECT in the three-terminal, 
diode-connected, and source-drain shorted (CV-like) 
biasing schemes. Transfer curves of p(g3T2-O) before 
and after cycling for 30 min (450 cycles) under the 
indicated biasing schemes in (f) ambient and (h) 
low-oxygen conditions. (g) Transfer curves of p 
(g3T2-O) in the diode-connected biasing scheme 
before cycling (black) and after cycling for 30 min 
(225 cycles) in the S-D shorted. Cycling stability of p 
(g3T2-O) in the three-terminal biasing scheme using 
(i) ITO and Au contacts, and (j) un-passivated and 
MCH SAM functionalized Au electrodes. Reprinted 
with permission from Ref. [66]. Copyright 2022, 
American Chemical Society.   
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
6
As indicated in the above study, biasing voltage amplitude would 
also affect the cycling stability of OECTs. Therefore, Schafer et al. 
employed a variety of biasing conditions (oxidative bias stress, reductive 
bias stress, and current stress) on p-type OECTs using poly(2,2’-(2-(3,3′- 
bis(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)-ethoxy)ethoxy))-bithiophene)-alt-2,5- 
furan) [p(g3T2-O)] as the channel to investigate the OECT performance 
degeneration mechanism [66]. Traditional three-terminal biasing 
scheme (in which the OMIEC channel experiencing a current stress from 
charge transport across the channel, an oxidative bias stress in the 
channel near the source, and a reductive bias stress near the drain), 
drain-gate shorted diode-connected biasing scheme (in which the 
channel subjects to oxidative bias stress and current stress), and CV-like 
source-drain (S-D) shorted biasing scheme (in which the channel expe­
riencing the oxidative and reductive bias stresses), are adopted to 
distinguish various stressing effects (Fig. 4e). As shown in Fig. 4f and g, 
it is obvious that current stress is not the main contributor to device 
degradation, since S-D shorted oxidatively cycled (0 to +0.7 V vs 
Ag/AgCl) devices lacking any current stress did not show less degrada­
tion but instead displayed greater degradation than diode-connected 
devices. Therefore, the combination of both reductive and oxidative 
bias stress was identified to be the apparent source of accelerated 
degradation. Cycling measurements are further conducted in a 
low-oxygen (O2) environment (Fig. 4h), which reveals that the accel­
erated degradation induced by the presence of a reductive bias stress at 
the drain electrode was completely dependent on the presence of oxy­
gen. Moreover, to determine if the materials of the electrode were the 
origin of performance degradation, OECTs with identical geometries but 
with different source/drain electrodes [Au or indium tin oxide (ITO)] 
are characterized. Pronounced differences in OECT degradation are 
observed (Fig. 4i), where OECT cycling in the traditional three-terminal 
biasing scheme with Au as source/drain electrodes shows a precipitous 
drop in ID (92.4% decrease of the pristine ID over 100 cycles), while 
OECT with ITO source/drain electrodes shows a reduced decay in ID 
(only 23.9% decrease over 100 cycles). Thus, Au as source/drain con­
tacts lead to accelerated degradation of OECT during cycling. By 
passivating Au with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM, here the mono­
layer is 6-mercapto-1-hexanol), the reductive bias stress driven reaction 
that accelerates OECT degradation can be effectively inhibited, which 
shows only 45% on ID deceases after 100 cycles (compared to nearly 
90% drop in OECT without the SAM) (Fig. 4j). The study indicates that 
accelerated OECT degradation was driven by a compounding effect of 
reductive and oxidative bias stress occurring in the presence of oxygen 
and un-passivated Au electrodes. Therefore, OECT’s cycling stability can 
be enhanced by removing oxygen, avoiding reductive potentials in the 
device biasing scheme, or avoiding the use of unpassivated Au elec­
trodes. However, the underlying mechanism of why gold electrodes 
would lead to distinct instability is still unclear. 
Based on the above studies, it can be concluded that the degradation 
of OECTs may result from several different mechanisms, namely, 
excessive uptake of water molecules that disrupt the physical in­
teractions between the polymer chains, parasitic side reactions that 
reduce the faradaic efficiency of the charge/discharge process, and bias 
stress on the source/drain electrodes which may lead to degenerated 
interfacial property and accelerates OECT degradation. 
3. OECTs with enhanced cycling stabilities 
Due to the above developments on the degradation mechanisms, 
OECTs with enhanced operational stability have been realized based on 
advanced polymer design, additive engineering, etc. In this section, 
OECTs with decent cycling stabilities are summarized in terms of 
different strategies. 
3.1. Advanced polymer design 
It is now clear that π-conjugated backbones in polymers are 
responsible for the (semi)conducting property of OMIECs [67], while 
hydrophilic side chains facilitate hydration and ion transport within the 
polymer film [68]. Consequently, the chemical structures of the back­
bone and side chains can be tuned independently to achieve efficient 
and selective ionic and electronic transport while maintaining high 
electrochemical stability [59,69]. Therefore, to provide insight into the 
effect of EG and alkyl chains on the microstructure of the films and OECT 
performance, Wang et al. incorporated four different types of side chains 
in polymer-based OMIECs (Fig. 5a): hybrid alkyl-EG chains (PIBET-AO), 
linear hydrophilic EG chains (PIBET-O), branched hydrophilic EG chains 
(PIBET-BO and PIBT-BO), and branched hydrophobic alkyl chains 
(PIBET-A) [70]. As shown in Fig. 5b, PIBET-AO-based OECT shows 
extremely stable cycling stability, with no decrease on the original 
current for over 6 h of cycling test (3628 cycles) at relatively high 
biasing conditions (VD = −0.6 V, VG steps from 0 to −0.8 V). PIBET-O, 
with linear EG chains, shows much lower cycling stability, retaining 
10% of the original ON current after just 40 min of cycling (400 cycles, 
Fig. 5c). Increasing the number of EG side chains from one in PIBET-O to 
two (branched) in PIBET-BO deteriorate even further the performance, 
retaining only 10% of the starting ON current after just 6 min of cycling 
(20 cycles, Fig. 5d). Similar result is also obtained in PIBT-BO, retaining 
21% of the ON current after 6 min of cycling (20 cycles, Fig. 5e). The 
inferior cycling stability observed for PIBET-BO and PIBT-BO can be 
attributed to the higher VGs (around −0.62 V and −0.8 V) required to 
effectively switch ON the device, causing overoxidation. 
Moreover, high EG content in PIBET-BO and PIBT-BO renders them 
more hydrophilic and prone to swell, which further reduces the inter­
chain charge transport. Exchanging EG with alkyl side chains (PIBET-A) 
leads to better stability in comparison to PIBET-BO and PIBT-BO, 
showing a decrease of ON current to 27% after 40 min cycling (20 cy­
cles, Fig. 5f). Better stability of PIBET-AO compared to these of PIBET- 
BO and PIBT-BO is due to closer distance between the alkyl fragments 
and the polymer backbone, which suppresses film morphology varia­
tions that might negatively affect interchain transport after cycling test. 
In this study, it is proved that the irreversible change in film micro­
structure caused by hydration is the main reason for the inferior cycling 
stability of OECTs based on EG-only polymers. While relatively good 
cycling stability of PIBET-AO highlights that a proper balance of alkyl 
and EG side chains is essential to achieve durable microstructure and 
long-term cycling stability. 
Furthermore, Moser et al. also demonstrated that the side chain 
redistribution in a polythiophene polymer is an effective strategy to 
improve both the OECT device performances and their cycling stability 
[32]. Starting from p(g3T2), a series of polymers are synthesized with 
the same average number of EG repeat units per polymer repeat unit 
after side chain redistributions, including p(g2T2-g4T2), p(g1T2-g5T2) 
and p(g0T2-g6T2) (Fig. 5g). Each polymer displayed significant passive 
swelling upon electrolyte exposure in the absence of VG, with the 
polymers swelling by 50 ± 15% on average. In addition, significant 
differences in the active swelling were recorded, where p(g3T2), p 
(g2T2-g4T2), p(g1T2-g5T2), and p(g0T2-g6T2) show volume increases 
of 249%, 168%, 10%, and 4%, respectively, under VG of +0.5 V. Despite 
similar energy levels, cycling stability of OECTs based these polymers 
varied significantly (Fig. 5h–k). After 700 cycles, OECT based on p 
(g3T2) only retained 15% of its initial ID, while p(g2T2-g4T2), p 
(g1T2-g5T2), and p(g0T2-g6T2) based OECTs keep 87%, 98%, and 98% 
of the original ID after the same cycling test. A strong inverse relation­
ship between the degree of active swelling and cycling stability is 
observed in this series of polymers. Since the morphological features of 
the polymers in their as-casted dry state is similar, along with compa­
rable degrees of passive swelling, the increased cycling stability of the 
polymers with lower degrees of active swelling can be attributed to the 
less volumetric expansion during OECT cycling, which is likely to lead to 
suppressed morphological changes that are detrimental to OECT per­
formance. Consequently, it is evident that the cycling stability of OECTs 
can be improved by purposely optimizing water uptake in OMIECs. 
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
7
Besides the relatively well-developed p-type OMIECs, the cycling 
stability of n-type OMIECs needs to be further enhanced to be compa­
rable to their p-type counterparts. Giovannitti et al. reported an n-type 
OECT based on p(gNDI-gT2) (Fig. 6a) [37], where such OECT presents 
good cycling stability (VD = 0.5 V) upon successive gate voltage pulses 
(VG switches between 0 and 0.5 V, pulse length = 5 s) for 5 mins (30 
cycles) (Fig. 6b). It can be concluded that during the 30 cycles, OECT 
performance is extremely stable with no current degradation. Long-term 
stability measurement is presented in Fig. 6c, where a 2 h stable device 
operation is demonstrated with no sign of degradation (VG switches 
between 0 and 0.5 V with the frequency of 0.1 Hz, 720 cycles). Such 
enhanced cycling stability is attributed to the doping energetics within 
the water-imposed stability window. Furthermore, Maria et al. intro­
duced two p(gNDI-gT2) derivatives featuring either a propyl (C3) or a 
hexyl (C6) spacer (Fig. 6a), p(C3-gNDI-gT2) and p(C6-gNDI-gT2), be­
tween the naphthalene diimide units and the EG units, and studied their 
electrochemical properties with 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution as elec­
trolyte [71]. The effect of adding alkyl spacers on the swelling property 
of the polymers was first investigated using quartz crystal microbalance 
with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D). It was shown that the largest 
Fig. 5. (a) Chemical structures and cycling stabilities 
of (b) PIBET-AO, (c) PIBET-O, (d) PIBET-BO, (e) PIBT- 
BO, and (f) PIBET-A. The data have been acquired for 
VD = −0.6 V and VG switches from 0 V to −0.8 V 
(b–e) or from 0 V to −1.0 V (f). Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [70]. Copyright 2019, American 
Chemical Society. (g) Chemical structures and cycling 
stabilities of (h) p(g3T2), (i) p(g2T2-g4T2), (j) p 
(g1T2-g5T2), and (k) p(g0T2-g6T2). Reprinted with 
permission 
from 
Ref. 
[32]. 
Copyright 
2020, 
Wiley-VCH GmbH.   
Fig. 6. (a) Chemical structures of p(gNDI-gT2), p(C3- 
gNDI-gT2), and p(C6-gNDI-gT2). Long-term cycling 
stability measurements during (b) the first 5 min and 
(c) the whole 2 h of the p(gNDI-gT2) based OECT in 
0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution. Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [37]. Copyright 2016, Springer 
Nature. (d) Long-term cycling stability measurements 
for 
p(gNDI-gT2), 
p(C3-gNDI-gT2), 
and 
p 
(C6-gNDI-gT2) based OECTs. Reprinted with permis­
sion from Ref. [71]. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH 
GmbH (e) Chemical structures of P4gNDTI and 
P4gNDI. (f) Cycling stability measurement (30 min, 
180 cycles) with alternating VG between 0 V and 0.5 
V (frequency of 0.1 Hz) and VD of 0.4 V for 
P4gNDTI-based OECT. Reprinted with permission 
from Ref. [72]. Copyright 2022, American Chemical 
Society. (g) Chemical structure of BBL. (h) Long-term 
cycling stability measurement of the OECT based on 
spray-coated BBL (VG between 0 V and 0.5 V, fre­
quency of 0.1 Hz). Reprinted with permission from 
Ref. [40]. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH 
& Co. KGaA, Weinheim.   
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
8
degree of passive swelling was observed for the polymer with the largest 
fraction of hydrophilic side chains (p(gNDI-gT2), 44%), followed by the 
polymer bearing a short C3-alkyl spacer (p(C3-gNDI-gT2), 28%) and an 
extended C6-alkyl spacer (p(C6-gNDI-gT2), 13%). The magnitude of the 
active swelling triggered by charging follows the same trend as the 
passive swelling. These results indicate that the inclusion of alkyl 
spacers between the naphthalene diimide units and the EG units is an 
effective strategy to manipulate the swelling degree. Cycling stability 
measurements are next carried out for all polymers by monitoring ID 
upon applying a square wave of VG (from 0 to 0.6 V with the frequency 
of 0.1 Hz) over 150 mins (~900 cycles) (Fig. 6d). Only 67% of the initial 
ID is retained after the cycling for p(gNDI-gT2) based OECT. Note, in 
Fig. 6c and d, the cycling stabilities of p(gNDI-gT2) based OECTs are not 
identical, which is likely attributed to the difference in applied VD, 
enabling variations on the voltage bias effect. Interestingly, in p 
(C3-gNDI-gT2) based OECT, ID shows a steady increase during the 
cycling and reveals a total increase of ≈19% after 900 cycles. On the 
other hand, p(C6-gNDI-gT2) based OECT shows extremely stable oper­
ation, with no change in ID for over 2 h of cycling. This work, along with 
similar research done by Wang et al. [70], demonstrates that optimi­
zation of the length of the alkyl spacer within the side chains is a typical 
strategy for improving the long-term operational stability of both p-type 
and n-type OMIECs. 
In addition, by substituting the NDI unit with the naph­
thodithiophene diimide (NDTI) unit, Maria et al. obtained P4gNDTI 
which possesses a more planar backbone with closer packing when 
compared with P4gNDI (Fig. 6e) [72]. By using GIWAXS characteristics, 
it was found that NDTI leads to tighter π−π stacking of the polymer 
chains with a significant contraction of the out-of-plane π-stack 
d-spacing in P4gNDTI (3.67 Å) relative to its NDI analogue (4.09 Å). 
Upon electrolyte exposure, P4gNDI showed a surprisingly large mass 
uptake, with a passive swelling that could not be quantified within the 
measurement window of the QCM-D sensors. However, P4gNDTI thin 
film only showed a passive swelling of 57%. The cycling stability of 
OECTs based on both polymers was next investigated with VG switching 
from 0 to 0.5 V with a frequency of 0.1 Hz (Fig. 6f). As P4gNDI-based 
OECT shows impractical low ID for long-term operation, P4gNDTI 
based OECT shows a remarkably stable cycling behavior. After an ID 
drop of only ~6% in the first two switching cycles, OECT based on 
P4gNDTI shows no change in ID after 30 mins (~180 cycles) of cycling 
test in 0.1 M NaCl aqueous electrolyte. These findings indicate that the 
incorporation of NDTI units leads to a higher electron affinity and 
reversible electrochemical reduction at a more positive potential, 
coupled with a lower swelling ability in aqueous media, resulting in 
improved cycling stability. 
Furthermore, Sun et al. have successfully used ladder-type polymers 
BBL as a stable and efficient n-channel material for OECTs (Fig. 6g) [40]. 
The BBL-based transistors were fabricated using facile spray-coating 
techniques and worked in accumulation mode with record high trans­
conductance (up to 9.7 mS) for n-type OECTs. Cycling stability evalua­
tion of such OECT (VD = 0.5 V, VG switches between 0 and 0.5 V with a 
frequency of 0.1 Hz) for 1 h (360 cycles) indicates that no current 
degradation is observed (Fig. 6h), which reveals that BBL holds very 
good operational stability in water electrolytes due to its high structural 
integrity and EA. 
3.2. Additive/dopant engineering 
Adding additives or dopant in active materials have been proven to 
be an effective method to enhance the (opto)electronic properties of 
various materials and electronics. It can enhance the mobility, stretch­
ability, and phase separation of various functional materials [73–75], 
and has been applied widely in transistors [76,77], solar cells [78], 
photodetectors [79], batteries [80], etc. In terms of OECT, since OMIECs 
share similar characteristics to these organic functional materials, 
additive/dopant engineering strategy has also been applied in 
enhancing the performance and stability of OMIECs [81–83]. 
As the most widely exercised OMIEC, various additives have been 
developed for PEDOT:PSS, such as ethylene [84], and ionic liquids [85]. 
By utilizing a matrix of PEDOT:PSS and nonionic surfactant Triton X-100 
(PEDOT:PSS/TX) as the channel, along with poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) 
hydrogel as a quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte, Ko et al. constructed 
all-solid-state OECTs that can be self-healable and possess good elec­
trical performance [86]. Such OECT maintains 97% of the initial ID after 
1000 cycles of gate pulse (VG switches from −0.4 to 0.6 V with a fre­
quency of 1 Hz) in 0.1 M NaCl electrolyte (Fig. 7a and b), which in­
dicates decent electrochemical reversibility of the PEDOT:PSS/TX 
channel layer. When using a Na+ ion-conducting PVA hydrogel as the 
electrolyte, the transient response of ID shows a rise time of 6.8 ms and 
maintains 98% ID after 1000 cycles (Fig. 7c and d). What’s more inter­
esting, even if the whole channel is scratched with a blade, the healed 
device (healing process: PVA hydrogel was placed onto the damaged 
channel layer and allowed to heal for 10 min) still shows stable cycling 
property, where ID retains 86% of the original value after 1000 cycles 
(Fig. 7e). Here, TX not only stabilizes PEDOT:PSS by facilitating the 
formation of PEDOT nanofibrils but also introduces self-healing prop­
erty by improving the viscoelastic properties of the PEDOT:PSS film. 
Additionally, Keene et al. imported aliphatic amine de-dopant molecules 
[either diethylenetriamine (DETA), N-methyl-2,2′-diaminodiethylamine 
(DEMTA), or tris(aminoethyl) amine (TAEA)] (Fig. 7f), and demon­
strated enhancement-mode OECTs based on PEDOT:PSS [87]. To shift 
PEDOT:PSS OECTs to enhancement mode, the amine de-dopants can 
effectively adjust the hole carrier concentration and adjust the VT of the 
PEDOT:PSS based OECTs to be below 0 V (from −5 to −100 mV). 
Moreover, OECT based on such PEDOT:PSS shows stable cycling prop­
erties for over 1000 cycles where VG switches between −0.3 and 0.2 V 
(Fig. 7g). 
In addition, n-type OECTs with molecular doping in an OMIEC were 
also introduced by Paterson et al. [88]. An ammonium salt, 
tetra-n-butylammonium fluoride (TBFA), is directly admixed with the 
conjugated polymer poly(N,N′-bis(7-glycol)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis 
(dicarboximide)-co-2,2′-bithiophene-co-N,N′-bis(2-octyldo-de­
cyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide) (P-90) (Fig. 7h) as the 
channel of OECTs. It was found that the TBFA acted as a simultaneous 
molecular dopant and morphology additive, leading to significantly 
improved gm and cycling stability. As shown in Fig. 7i, OECT based on 
P-90:TBAF(40 mol%) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) electrolyte 
demonstrates excellent cycling stability, where extremely stable transfer 
characteristics and maximum gm are acquired after 4.5 h of cycling test 
(VG switches from 0 to 0.4 V with the frequency of 0.05 Hz, 810 cycles). 
The delicate cycling stability was attributed to the stabilization of the 
OMIEC due to the n-type doping. Specifically, the TBAF-doping would 
provide electron charge carriers to fill pre-existing trap states in P-90, 
which in turn minimizes the trapping/de-trapping process during device 
operation and electrochemical doping. Therefore, improved cycling 
stability was achieved by this simple doping method. 
3.3. Other strategies 
Other than advanced polymer design and additive/dopant engi­
neering, strategies, including solvent screening, electrolyte optimiza­
tion, and morphology/microstructure construction, may also be adopted 
to enhance the cycling stability of OECTs. 
For instance, the choice of semiconductor-solvent system can be 
extremely important, which can provide fine control over the micro/ 
nano structure of the OMIECs during layer deposition, where not only 
microscale morphology can be effectively modulated, but also the ag­
gregation property of the OMIECs can be tuned [89–91]. Recently, Zhu 
et al. fabricated high-performance OECTs without resorting to any ad­
ditives or further treatments, but simply with three fluorinated alcohols 
[FAs, including 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE), 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoroiso­
propanol (HFIP) and perfluoro-tert-butanol (PFTB)], respectively, as 
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
9
the processing solvents (Fig. 8b) [92]. Compared with the device in 
which the OMIEC [here the material is glycolated naphthalene bis-isatin 
rhodanine (gNR) (Fig. 8a)] is processed with the most popular solvent, 
chloroform (CF), other OECTs reveal much better cycling stabilities 
(Fig. 8c). Specifically, all the OECTs fabricated with FA solvents show 
nearly 10 times higher retention of the initial ID (63.9%, 61.6%, and 
75.2% for OECTs with TFE, HFIP, and PFTB, respectively) when 
compared to that (7.3%) with CF as solvent. By employing scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM), AFM, and GIWAXS characteristics, it was 
found that OMIEC films with FAs as solvent possessed unique micro­
structures with optimized aggregates, which could largely suppress the 
penetration and destruction of oxygen and water from the electrolyte. 
More importantly, such a simple solvent engineering method was shown 
to be generalizable to other n-type OMIECs. For example, OECTs based 
on an n-type small-molecule mixed conductor (Fig. 8d), 4Cl-PDI-4EG, 
show sufficient cycling stability when processing with HFIP as the 
Fig. 7. Schematic diagrams of the PEDOT:PSS/TX OECT with (a) 0.1 M NaCl and (b) PVA hydrogel as the electrolyte, respectively. Cycling stability measurements 
with VG (from-0.4 to 0.6 V with a frequency of 1 Hz) switches for 1000 cycles in (c) 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution, and (d, e) with PVA hydrogel as the electrolyte, 
respectively. Note, (e) is for cycling of the healed OECT. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [86]. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 
Weinheim. (f) Schematic of the enhancement mode OECT based on PEDOT:PSS, along with the chemical structures of the amine de-dopants. (g) Cycling stability 
measurement of the enhancement mode OECT for 1000 cycles, where VG switches from −0.3 to 0.2 V. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [87]. Copyright 2020, 
WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (h) Chemical structure of P-90 and TBFA additive. (i) Transfer and gm characteristics of an OECT based on P-90: 
TBAF(40 mol%) before and after cycling test under VG of 0–0.4 V with the frequency of 0.1 Hz for 4.5 h (810 cycles). Reprinted with permission from Ref. [88]. 
Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Fig. 8. Chemical structures of (a) gNR and (b) the processing solvents. (c) Cycling stability of gNR-based OECTs coated by different solvents over 1 h (600 cycles). (d) 
Chemical structures of 4Cl-PDI-4EG. (e) Cycling stability of 4Cl-PDI-4EG-6FOH based OECT over 1 h in 0.1 M NaCl aqueous electrolyte under ambient conditions. 
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [92]. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
10
solvent, where no decrease in ID over 1 h of cycling test is achieved (600 
cycles, where VG switches from 0 to 0.5 V with a frequency of 1/6 Hz) 
(Fig. 8e). 
On the other hand, self-doped conductive polyelectrolytes (CPEs), 
such as poly(4-(2,3-dihydrothieno-(1,4)-dioxin-2-yl-methoxy)-1-buta­
nesulfonic acid) (PEDOT-S), was applied as the channel of OECTs with 
decent perforamnce [93–95]. However, the charged groups in PEDOT-S 
also introduced good water solubility, which prevented the utilization of 
aqueous electrolytes during OECT characterization. Such hydrophilic 
characteristics of the self-doped CPEs can be effectively modified by 
counterion exchange with selected ammonium salts, resulting in hy­
drophobic CPE:ammonium salt complexes [96,97]. By exploiting the 
interplay of the CPEs self-doping ability and hydrophobicity, Zeglio 
et al. obtained water-based OECTs with shorter switching times, higher 
gm and Ion/off ratios, along with enhanced cycling stability [23]. In 
addition to PEDOT-S, the authors produced OECTs using PEDOT-S: 
ammonium complexes as active materials, including PEDOT-S:(Nonyl) 
NH3 and PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 (Fig. 9a). The effect of counterion ex­
change on device stability has been evaluated. As shown in Fig. 9b, 
PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 based OECT could be operated for over 104 cycles 
without showing any sign of degradation. Conversely, PEDOT-S:(Nonyl) 
NH3 based OECT has lower stability, and retains 71% of the original ID 
after 102 cycles (Fig. 9c). Moreover, PEDOT-S based OECT shows even 
worse stability, retaining only 39% of the starting ID after 400 cycles 
(Fig. 9d). PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 based OECT represents one of the early 
examples of OECT displaying high aqueous cycling stability. It indicates 
that changes in counterion can lead to differences in film morphology, 
which had been related to alterations in device characteristics, such as 
switching ability and long-term stability. This research highlights the 
importance of steric hindrance of the counterion for reversibility of 
redox and/or ion exchange processes occurring between the electrolyte 
and the OMIEC, and shows that counterion exchange is an effective 
method to improve the stability of the OECT. 
In addition, through a holistic innovation in material and device 
designs, Dai et al. have reported an intrinsically stretchable electro­
chemical transistor-based neuromorphic device [98], which provides 
excellent switching endurance (Fig. 9e). As shown in Fig. 9f, to examine 
the switching endurance of the device, more than 108 pulses have been 
applied during repeated long-term potentiation-depression (LTP-LTD) 
cycles, and no significant degradation of the device performance can be 
observed. Note, the detail of the applied potentiation and depression 
pulse can be found in the insets of Fig. 9f. Such long cycling stability 
(even though without aggressive VG bias), benefits from the optimized 
electrolyte. Such electrolyte was realized by creating a hybrid 
organo-hydro-gel, based on a polyacrylamide network swelled by a 
water-glycerol binary solvent. Glycerol, which can form strong 
hydrogen bonding with water, is applied for the achievement of gel 
dielectric with long-term stability. This is realized by preventing dehy­
dration and lowering the freezing point when introducing glycerol, and 
further contributes to the long-term stability of the OECT. 
It has been discussed in section 2, that water uptake in OMIECs could 
lead to obvious performance degeneration, and chemical structure 
design, especially side chain engineering, can effectively modulate the 
swell property of OMIECs and lead to stable cycling characteristics. On 
the other hand, crystallinity and molecular packing differences of the 
same OMIECs can also strongly alter water uptake, ion transport, and 
charge carrier transport in the active material bulk [33]. Kim et al. 
investigated the close correlation among film microstructural crystal­
linity/composition, electrochemical transistor performance, and 
aqueous stability in various PEDOT:PSS films, including pristine, 
ethylene glycol-treated (EG-P), and crystallized PEDOT:PSS (Crys-P) 
films, all of which consist of only PEDOT and PSS without any chemical 
crosslinkers [such as 3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GOPS)] [99]. 
As shown in Fig. 10a, the transfer characteristic of Crys-P based OECT 
shows no significant change even after being immersed in 0.1 M NaCl 
solution for 21 days, whereas that of EG-P based OECT gradually reduces 
down to half of the initial ID under the same condition. By measuring the 
film thicknesses using liquid-cell AFM under water, it was revealed that 
the Crys-P film showed only a 20% increase in thickness after water 
dipping, while the EG-P film showed a 480% increase in thickness. Such 
tremendous differences in the swell properties of the films also lead to 
different cycling stability. As shown in Fig. 10b, a Crys-P based OECT 
exhibits stable cycling characteristics after 2000 cycles (VG switches 
between 0 and 0.6 V with a frequency of 1 Hz). Whereas the EG-P based 
OECT exhibits a significant decrease in ID over time, in which the initial 
ID reduces by ~75% after 2000 cycles. This research demonstrated that 
Fig. 9. (a) Chemical structure of PEDOT-S and 
PEDOT-S:ammonium salts. Cycling stability mea­
surements of (b) PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 and (c) PEDOT- 
S:(Nonyl)NH3 based OECTs for the first 50 cycles 
(black) and last 50 cycles (red), acquired at VD =
−0.4 V and VG from −0.5 to 0.4 V. (d) Cycling sta­
bility measurement of PEDOT-S based OECT (400 
cycles, with VG from −0.5 to 0.4 V and VD = −0.4 V). 
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [23]. Copyright 
2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Wein­
heim. (e) Design of the stretchable neuromorphic 
device. (f) Endurance with more than 108 write­
s/erase pulses. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref. [98]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier Inc.   
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
11
Crys-P based OECTs were remarkably resistant to harsh conditions such 
as long-term water immersion and repeated gate bias switching. It is 
suggested that Crys-P provided highly ordered crystallized polymer 
microstructure in combination with nanoscale pores, which facilitated 
not only efficient hole transport in the horizontal channel but also un­
impeded ion permeation into conjugated moieties in the vertical direc­
tion. In the meantime, minimal hydrophilic PSS residues attenuated the 
volume change of the film, thus providing robust cycling stability in 
prolonged contact with aqueous electrolytes. Similarly, Kim et al. 
developed high-performance polypyrrole-based OECTs by controlling 
crystallinity over a large range [100]. The crystallite size and relative 
degree of crystallinity (rDoC) were controlled by adjusting the connector 
(4,4’biphenyldisulfonic acid, BPDSA) versus monomer (pyrrole) stoi­
chiometry during the direct deposition of poly(pyrrole:4,4’biphenyldi­
sulfonic acid:pyrrole) [P-(Py:BPDSA:Py)] films on substrates via 
two-monomer-connected precursor (TMCP) polymerization (Fig. 10c). 
Note, the polymerization process was controlled by varying the BPDSA 
stoichiometry to be 100 to 75, 50, and 25%, which leads to the resultant 
P(Py:BPDSA:Py)-n (n = 100, 75, 50, and 25) films, respectively. Under 
the condition of repetitive gate bias switching, the most stable cycling 
performance is achieved in P(Py:BPDSA:Py)-100 with minimum ID 
variations during 200 cycles (VG switches between +0.5 V and −0.3 V). 
However, other P(Py:BPDSA:Py) with lower BPDSA contents show 
inferior cycling stabilities, where obvious degradation of the ID is 
observed beginning from less than 100 cycles (Fig. 10d). Specifically, 
during the cycling stability test, the on-state ID of various OECT con­
taining 100, 75, 50 and 25% BPDSA was reduced by ~47%, ~81%, 
~99%, and ~79%, respectively. By combining the above results with 
the root of the polymers, it was indicated that the enhanced stability in 
the well-ordered crystalline polymeric material with certain rDoC is due 
to their immunity to the unfixed state of the BPDSA molecule in the 
electrolyte. As the P(Py:BPDSA:Py) was dedoped by applying a positive 
VG, two sodium ions would bind to the BPDSA by replacing pyrrole. The 
resultant, Na:BPDSA:Na, would then hold tremendous freedom in the 
polymer matrix. Therefore, the redox process of P(Py:BPDSA:Py) 
showed inferior reversibility when holding less rDoC, and result in fast 
degradation during the cycling test. On the other hand, with more than 
75% BPDSA, tighter molecular packing was achieved, P(Py:BPDSA:Py) 
showed better cycling stability. This research indicates that the stability 
of OECTs can be effectively enhanced through fine control of the 
crystallinity and molecular packing of conjugated polymers. 
4. Conclusions and prospects 
In this review, factors that may lead to the OECT degradation on 
cycling stability are first summarized based on the working principle of 
OECTs. Specifically, the swelling effect, side reaction, and bias stress on 
the OMIECs due to the ionic doping/dedoping process are the major 
reasons for the cycling stability degeneration. 
Note, side reaction and bias stress effects can be effectively avoided 
by applying novel OMIECs with deeper energies levels, excluding oxy­
gen species, and as low as possible driving voltages (which also requires 
OMIECs with proper energy levels for reduced VTs) [65,66]. While 
swelling of the OMIECs is a double-edged sword, where it leads to 
effective ion doping/dedoping and variation on the microstructure of 
the OMIECs bulk simultaneously. Therefore, controllable swelling is 
preferred since uncontrolled water uptake could lead to a less effective 
electron/hole carrier transport path and inferior cycling stability. 
Redistribution of the side chain length and the alkyl-EG hybrid chain 
constitution of OMIECs can effectively modulate swelling effect, and 
have shown enhanced cycling stability in both p-type and n-type OECTs 
[32,37,70,72]. While, emerging ladder-type n-type BBL shows both high 
gm and decent cycling stability due to its unique rigid planar backbone, 
which shows a mild swelling effect along with high crystallinity [40]. 
Therefore, manipulating the crystallinity of OMIECs, which hold both 
porous ionic transport paths and close π-π* stacking, has also been 
proved to be an applicable method to further enhance cycling stability 
[99,100]. Additives in OMIECs can also facilitate ion diffusion and sta­
bilize the microstructure by either introducing ions that can better 
dope/dedope the OMIECs bulk or leaving a porous ionic path during the 
film fabrication process [87,88]. Moreover, solid-state electrolytes, such 
as sol-gels, have shown the potential in suppressing the side effect of 
swelling and can lead to ultra-stable cycling [86]. 
As a result, recent advances in OECTs with enhanced cycling sta­
bilities are listed in Table 1, where parameters on cycle stability, along 
with the channel material, electrolyte, and normalized gm, are summa­
rized. From Table 1, it is obvious that research on stable OECTs focuses 
more on p-type OMIECs, due to the lack of high-performance n-type 
OMIECs. Note that the highest cycling stability up to 104 cycles has been 
achieved, while for the best n-type OECTs reported to date, stable 
Fig. 10. (a) Transfer curves of Crys-P and 5% EG-P 
based OECTs over aging time in 0.1 M NaCl 
aqueous solution. (b) Normalized current on/off ratio 
of Crys-P and EG-P OECTs traced during the repeated 
VG switching up to 2000 cycles. Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [99]. Copyright 2018, Springer 
Nature. (c) P(Py:BPDSA:Py) film preparation process. 
(d) Normalized current on−off ratios of P(Py:BPDSA: 
Py)-n OECTs traced during the repeated switching of 
VG up to 100 cycles. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref. [100]. Copyright 2020, American Chemical 
Society.   
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
12
cycling is limited to less than 103 cycles. Moreover, from Table 1, several 
OMIECs show superior stable performance compared to other counter­
parts, which are PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 for p-type OMIECs, and p(C6- 
gNDI-gT2) for n-type OMIECs. 
Despite the rapid developments in OECTs, there are still several 
important aspects that need to be further optimized/studied to further 
improve cycling stability. First, a standard for cycling stability tests on 
OECTs is still missing. For now, it is still not clear whether either cycling 
time or cycling number affects the stability more. Moreover, the total 
amount of (ionic) charge that has been injected/extracted during an 
experiment may be one important factor that leads to the OECT degra­
dation during cycling characteristics. However, due to the inconsistency 
of the experimental conditions in the reported literature, not all OECTs 
worked in saturation regions during cycling. While, they share various 
device geometries and encapsulation/patterning differences, making it 
difficult to quantify the total amount of (ionic) charge that has been 
injected/extracted during cycling. Therefore, systematic research on 
how to evaluate the stability of OECTs is in urgent need. Second, OECT 
performance evaluation/optimization is mainly limited to material en­
gineering. While as a mixed ionic-electronic device, the influence of 
innovative device structures (for instance, vertical structure) with ultra- 
high performances on cycling stability is rarely studied [102–104]. 
Third, despite the above-mentioned ways to optimize the OMIEC 
channel, classical ways, including molecular weight variation [105], 
have not been explored extensively. 
With systematical research on the above-mentioned research as­
pects, the cycling stability of OECTs will be extensively enhanced, and it 
is expected that OECTs with required cycling stability will be able to 
unlock their full potential in emerging applications in bioelectronics 
(including biosensors, brain-machine interfaces, prosthetics) and next- 
generation artificial intelligence (including biomimetic neurons/syn­
apse, memristor, soft robotics). 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Wei Huang reports financial support was provided by National Key R&D 
Program of China. Wei Huang reports financial support was provided by 
National Natural Science Foundation of China. Wei Huang reports 
financial support was provided by Sichuan Science and Technology 
Program. 
Data availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Pro­
gram of China (2022YFE0134800), the National Natural Science Foun­
dation of China (Nos. 62273073, U2030205, 62003075, 61903065, 
62003074, 82002395), and the Sichuan Science and Technology Pro­
gram (Nos. 2021YJ0432, 2022NSFSC0877, 2022JDJQ0040). W. Huang 
also thanks the financial support of the UESTC Excellent Young Scholar 
Project. 
References 
[1] H.S. White, G.P. Kittlesen, M.S. Wrighton, Chemical derivatization of an array of 
three gold microelectrodes with polypyrrole: fabrication of a molecule-based 
transistor, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 106 (1984) 5375–5377, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ja00330a070. 
[2] P. Li, T. Lei, Molecular design strategies for high-performance organic 
electrochemical transistors, J. Polym. Sci. 60 (2021) 377–392, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/pol.20210503. 
[3] W. Wang, Z. Li, M. Li, L. Fang, F. Chen, S. Han, L. Lan, J. Chen, Q. Chen, H. Wang, 
C. Liu, Y. Yang, W. Yue, Z. Xie, High-transconductance, highly elastic, durable 
Table 1 
Summary of the OECTs with cycling stability reported.  
Type 
Channel material 
Electrolyte 
Normalized gm (mS/cm) 
Cyclings & Remained ID compared to initial ID 
VG (V) 
Frequency (Hz) 
Pulse Duration (s) 
Ref. 
P-type 
PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 
BMIMBF4 
NA 
104, ~100% 
−0.5 to 0.4 
NA 
NA 
[23] 
crystallized PEDOT:PSS 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
2 × 103,~100% 
0.6 to 0 
1 
1/2 
[99] 
PEDOT:PSS + Amine de-dopant 
100 mM NaCl 
NA 
103, ~100% 
0.2 to −0.3 
NA 
NA 
[87] 
PEDOT:PSS/[EMIM][Cl] 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
4 × 103, 96% 
−0.4 to 0.6 
1 
1/2 
[101] 
PEDOT:PSS/TX 
0.1 M NaCl 
4900 
103, 97% 
−0.4 to 0.6 
1 
1/2 
[86] 
gBDT-MeOT2 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
300, 93% 
0 to −0.4 
1/6 
3 
[60] 
PIBET-AO 
0.05 M KCl/0.05 M CaCl2 
1300 
3628, ~100% 
0 to −0.8 
NA 
NA 
[70] 
p(g1T2-g5T2) 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
720, 98% 
NA 
1/10 
5 
[32] 
PTDPP-DT 
0.1 M EMIM BF4 
NA 
500, 96% 
0 to −0.7 
1/4 
2 
[9] 
p(gPyDPP-MeOT2) 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
400, ~100% 
0 to −0.5 
1/4 
2 
[65] 
N-type 
BBL 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
360, ~100% 
0 to 0.5 
1/10 
5 
[40] 
p(gNDI-gT2) 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
720, ~100% 
0 to 0.5 
1/10 
5 
[37] 
p(C3-gNDI-gT2) 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
900, 119% 
0 to 0.6 
1/10 
5 
[71] 
p(C6-gNDI-gT2) 
0.1 M NaCl 
NA 
900, ~100% 
0 to 0.6 
1/10 
5 
[71] 
P4gNDI 
0.1 M NaCl 
0.47 
180, ~100% 
0 to 0.5 
1/10 
5 
[72]  
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
13
and recyclable all-polymer electrochemical transistors with 3D micro-engineered 
interfaces, Nano-Micro Lett. 14 (2022) 184, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820- 
022-00930-5. 
[4] A. Nawaz, Q. Liu, W.L. Leong, K.E. Fairfull-Smith, P. Sonar, Organic 
electrochemical transistors for in vivo bioelectronics, Adv. Mater. 33 (2021), 
e2101874, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202101874. 
[5] B.D. Paulsen, K. Tybrandt, E. Stavrinidou, J. Rivnay, Organic mixed ionic- 
electronic conductors, Nat. Mater. 19 (2020) 13–26, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41563-019-0435-z. 
[6] J. Rivnay, P. Leleux, M. Ferro, M. Sessolo, A. Williamson, D.A. Koutsouras, 
D. Khodagholy, M. Ramuz, X. Strakosas, R.M. Owens, C. Benar, J.-M. Badier, 
C. Bernard, G.G. Malliaras, High-performance transistors for bioelectronics 
through tuning of channel thickness, Sci. Adv. 1 (2015), e1400251, https://doi. 
org/10.1126/sciadv.1400251. 
[7] W. Huang, J. Chen, G. Wang, Y. Yao, X. Zhuang, R.M. Pankow, Y. Cheng, T. 
J. Marks, A. Facchetti, Dielectric materials for electrolyte gated transistor 
applications, J. Mater. Chem. C 9 (2021) 9348–9376, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
d1tc02271g. 
[8] D. Khodagholy, J. Rivnay, M. Sessolo, M. Gurfinkel, P. Leleux, L.H. Jimison, 
E. Stavrinidou, T. Herve, S. Sanaur, R.M. Owens, G.G. Malliaras, High 
transconductance organic electrochemical transistors, Nat. Commun. 4 (2013) 
2133, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3133. 
[9] X. Wu, Q. Liu, A. Surendran, S.E. Bottle, P. Sonar, W.L. Leong, Enhancing the 
electrochemical doping efficiency in diketopyrrolopyrrole-based polymer for 
organic electrochemical transistors, Adv. Electron. Mater. 7 (2020), 2000701, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.202000701. 
[10] M. Braendlein, T. Lonjaret, P. Leleux, J.M. Badier, G.G. Malliaras, Voltage 
amplifier based on organic electrochemical transistor, Adv. Sci. 4 (2017), 
1600247, https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.201600247. 
[11] A. Campana, T. Cramer, D.T. Simon, M. Berggren, F. Biscarini, 
Electrocardiographic recording with conformable organic electrochemical 
transistor fabricated on resorbable bioscaffold, Adv. Mater. 26 (2014) 
3874–3878, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201400263. 
[12] D. Khodagholy, J.N. Gelinas, T. Thesen, W. Doyle, O. Devinsky, G.G. Malliaras, 
G. Buzsaki, NeuroGrid: recording action potentials from the surface of the brain, 
Nat. Neurosci. 18 (2015) 310–315, https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3905. 
[13] W. Lee, D. Kim, J. Rivnay, N. Matsuhisa, T. Lonjaret, T. Yokota, H. Yawo, 
M. Sekino, G.G. Malliaras, T. Someya, Integration of organic electrochemical and 
field-effect transistors for ultraflexible, high temporal resolution 
electrophysiology arrays, Adv. Mater. 28 (2016) 9722–9728, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.201602237. 
[14] A. Williamson, M. Ferro, P. Leleux, E. Ismailova, A. Kaszas, T. Doublet, 
P. Quilichini, J. Rivnay, B. Rozsa, G. Katona, C. Bernard, G.G. Malliaras, Localized 
neuron stimulation with organic electrochemical transistors on delaminating 
depth probes, Adv. Mater. 27 (2015) 4405–4410, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201500218. 
[15] K. Xie, N.X. Wang, X.D. Lin, Z.X. Wang, X. Zhao, P.L. Fang, H.B. Yue, J.W. Kim, 
J. Luo, S.Y. Cui, F. Yan, P. Shi, Organic electrochemical transistor arrays for real- 
time mapping of evoked neurotransmitter release in vivo, Elife 9 (2020), e50345, 
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50345. 
[16] P. Lin, F. Yan, J. Yu, H.L. Chan, M. Yang, The application of organic 
electrochemical transistors in cell-based biosensors, Adv. Mater. 22 (2010) 
3655–3660, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201000971. 
[17] J. Rivnay, M. Ramuz, P. Leleux, A. Hama, M. Huerta, R.M. Owens, Organic 
electrochemical transistors for cell-based impedance sensing, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
106 (2015), 043301, https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4906872. 
[18] F. Santoro, Y. van de Burgt, S.T. Keene, B. Cui, A. Salleo, Enhanced cell-chip 
coupling by rapid femtosecond laser patterning of soft PEDOT:PSS biointerfaces, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (2017) 39116–39121, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsami.7b12308. 
[19] S. Demuru, C.-H. Huang, K. Parvez, R. Worsley, G. Mattana, B. Piro, V. No¨el, 
C. Casiraghi, D. Briand, All-inkjet-Printed graphene-gated organic 
electrochemical transistors on polymeric foil as highly sensitive enzymatic 
biosensors, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 5 (2022) 1664–1673, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsanm.1c04434. 
[20] D. Majak, J. Fan, M. Gupta, Fully 3D printed OECT based logic gate for detection 
of cation type and concentration, Sens. Actuators, B 286 (2019) 111–118, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2019.01.120. 
[21] G. Scheiblin, A. Aliane, X. Strakosas, V.F. Curto, R. Coppard, G. Marchand, R. 
M. Owens, P. Mailley, G.G. Malliaras, Screen-printed organic electrochemical 
transistors for metabolite sensing, MRS Commun 5 (2015) 507–511, https://doi. 
org/10.1557/mrc.2015.52. 
[22] Y. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Zhu, Y. Tao, Y. Chen, Q. Liu, X. Liu, D. Wang, Woven fiber 
organic electrochemical transistors based on multiwalled carbon nanotube 
functionalized PEDOT nanowires for nondestructive detection of potassium ions, 
Mater. Sci. Eng. B 278 (2022), 115657, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
mseb.2022.115657. 
[23] E. Zeglio, J. Eriksson, R. Gabrielsson, N. Solin, O. Inganas, Highly stable 
conjugated polyelectrolytes for water-based hybrid mode electrochemical 
transistors, Adv. Mater. 29 (2017), 1605787, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201605787. 
[24] S.T. Keene, D. Fogarty, R. Cooke, C.D. Casadevall, A. Salleo, O. Parlak, Wearable 
organic electrochemical transistor patch for multiplexed sensing of calcium and 
ammonium ions from human perspiration, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 8 (2019), 
e1901321, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201901321. 
[25] J. Kang, Y.W. Lim, I. Lee, S. Kim, K.Y. Kim, W. Lee, B.S. Bae, Photopatternable 
poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) for an intrinsically stretchable organic 
electrochemical transistor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14 (2022) 24840–24849, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c06343. 
[26] W. Lee, D. Kim, N. Matsuhisa, M. Nagase, M. Sekino, G.G. Malliaras, T. Yokota, 
T. Someya, Transparent, conformable, active multielectrode array using organic 
electrochemical transistors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114 (2017) 
10554–10559, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1703886114. 
[27] S. Park, S.W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, 
M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima, T. Someya, Self-powered ultra- 
flexible electronics via nano-grating-patterned organic photovoltaics, Nature 561 
(2018) 516–521, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0536-x. 
[28] Y. Liang, M. Ernst, F. Brings, D. Kireev, V. Maybeck, A. Offenhausser, D. Mayer, 
High performance flexible organic electrochemical transistors for monitoring 
cardiac action potential, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 7 (2018), e1800304, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adhm.201800304. 
[29] E. Zeglio, O. Inganas, Active materials for organic electrochemical transistors, 
Adv. Mater. 30 (2018), e1800941, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201800941. 
[30] A. Giovannitti, D.T. Sbircea, S. Inal, C.B. Nielsen, E. Bandiello, D.A. Hanifi, 
M. Sessolo, G.G. Malliaras, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, Controlling the mode of 
operation of organic transistors through side-chain engineering, Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 113 (2016) 12017–12022, https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.1608780113. 
[31] C.B. Nielsen, A. Giovannitti, D.T. Sbircea, E. Bandiello, M.R. Niazi, D.A. Hanifi, 
M. Sessolo, A. Amassian, G.G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Molecular 
design of semiconducting polymers for high-performance organic electrochemical 
transistors, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016) 10252–10259, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jacs.6b05280. 
[32] M. Moser, T.C. Hidalgo, J. Surgailis, J. Gladisch, S. Ghosh, R. Sheelamanthula, 
Q. Thiburce, A. Giovannitti, A. Salleo, N. Gasparini, A. Wadsworth, I. Zozoulenko, 
M. Berggren, E. Stavrinidou, S. Inal, I. McCulloch, Side chain redistribution as a 
strategy to boost organic electrochemical transistor performance and stability, 
Adv. Mater. 32 (2020), e2002748, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202002748. 
[33] H. Jia, Z. Huang, P. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Wang, J.-Y. Wang, X. Gu, T. Lei, Engineering 
donor–acceptor conjugated polymers for high-performance and fast-response 
organic electrochemical transistors, J. Mater. Chem. C 9 (2021) 4927–4934, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/d1tc00440a. 
[34] J. Duan, G. Zhu, L. Lan, J. Chen, X. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Yu, H. Liao, Z. Li, 
I. McCulloch, W. Yue, Electron-deficient polycyclic molecules via ring fusion for 
n-type organic electrochemical transistors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 135 (2022), 
e202213737, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202213737. 
[35] H. Sun, J. Gerasimov, M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, n-Type organic electrochemical 
transistors: materials and challenges, J. Mater. Chem. C 6 (2018) 11778–11784, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c8tc03185a. 
[36] X. Wu, T.L.D. Tam, S. Chen, T. Salim, X. Zhao, Z. Zhou, M. Lin, J. Xu, Y.L. Loo, W. 
L. Leong, All-polymer bulk-heterojunction organic electrochemical transistors 
with balanced ionic and electronic transport, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022), e2206118, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202206118. 
[37] A. Giovannitti, C.B. Nielsen, D.T. Sbircea, S. Inal, M. Donahue, M.R. Niazi, D. 
A. Hanifi, A. Amassian, G.G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, N-type organic 
electrochemical transistors with stability in water, Nat. Commun. 7 (2016), 
13066, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13066. 
[38] A. Babel, S.A. Jenekhe, High electron mobility in ladder polymer field-effect 
transistors, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) 13656–13657, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/ja0371810. 
[39] S. Wang, H. Sun, U. Ail, M. Vagin, P.O. Persson, J.W. Andreasen, W. Thiel, 
M. Berggren, X. Crispin, D. Fazzi, S. Fabiano, Thermoelectric properties of 
solution-processed n-doped ladder-type conducting polymers, Adv. Mater. 28 
(2016) 10764–10771, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201603731. 
[40] H. Sun, M. Vagin, S. Wang, X. Crispin, R. Forchheimer, M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, 
Complementary logic circuits based on high-performance n-type organic 
electrochemical transistors, Adv. Mater. 30 (2018), 1704916, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.201704916. 
[41] M. Moser, J.F. Ponder, A. Wadsworth, A. Giovannitti, I. McCulloch, Materials in 
organic electrochemical transistors for bioelectronic applications: past, present, 
and future, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2018), 1807033, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adfm.201807033. 
[42] X. Wu, S. Chen, M. Moser, A. Moudgil, S. Griggs, A. Marks, T. Li, I. McCulloch, W. 
L. Leong, High performing solid-state organic electrochemical transistors enabled 
by glycolated polythiophene and ion-gel electrolyte with a wide operation 
temperature range from −50 to 110 ◦C, Adv. Funct. Mater. (2022), 2209354, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202209354. 
[43] Y. He, N.A. Kukhta, A. Marks, C.K. Luscombe, The effect of side chain engineering 
on conjugated polymers in organic electrochemical transistors for bioelectronic 
applications, J. Mater. Chem. C 10 (2022) 2314–2332, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
d1tc05229b. 
[44] N.A. Kukhta, A. Marks, C.K. Luscombe, Molecular design strategies toward 
improvement of charge injection and ionic conduction in organic mixed ionic- 
electronic conductors for organic electrochemical transistors, Chem. Rev. 122 
(2022) 4325–4355, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00266. 
[45] A. Marks, S. Griggs, N. Gasparini, M. Moser, Organic electrochemical transistors: 
an emerging Technology for biosensing, Adv. Mater. Interfac. 9 (2022), 2102039, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202102039. 
[46] R.B. Rashid, X. Ji, J. Rivnay, Organic electrochemical transistors in bioelectronic 
circuits, Biosens. Bioelectron. 190 (2021), 113461, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bios.2021.113461. 
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
14
[47] X. Strakosas, M. Bongo, R.M. Owens, The organic electrochemical transistor for 
biological applications, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 132 (2015), 41735, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/app.41735. 
[48] J. Wen, J. Xu, W. Huang, C. Chen, L. Bai, Y. Cheng, Integrated sensing arrays 
based on organic electrochemical transistors, IEEE Open J. Nanotechnol. 3 (2022) 
101–115, https://doi.org/10.1109/ojnano.2022.3215135. 
[49] Y. Zhong, A. Saleh, S. Inal, Decoding electrophysiological signals with organic 
electrochemical transistors, Macromol. Biosci. 21 (2021), e2100187, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/mabi.202100187. 
[50] A.D. Franklin, M.C. Hersam, H.S.P. Wong, Carbon nanotube transistors: making 
electronics from molecules, Science 378 (2022) 726–732, https://doi.org/ 
10.1126/science.abp8278. 
[51] J. Rivnay, S. Inal, A. Salleo, R.M. Owens, M. Berggren, G.G. Malliaras, Organic 
electrochemical transistors, Nat. Rev. Mater. 3 (2018), 17086, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/natrevmats.2017.86. 
[52] C. Cendra, A. Giovannitti, A. Savva, V. Venkatraman, I. McCulloch, A. Salleo, 
S. Inal, J. Rivnay, Role of the anion on the transport and structure of organic 
mixed conductors, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2018), 1807034, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adfm.201807034. 
[53] J.O. Guardado, A. Salleo, Structural effects of gating poly(3-hexylthiophene) 
through an ionic liquid, Adv. Funct. Mater. 27 (2017), 1701791, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adfm.201701791. 
[54] L.Q. Flagg, R. Giridharagopal, J. Guo, D.S. Ginger, Anion-dependent doping and 
charge transport in organic electrochemical transistors, Chem. Mater. 30 (2018) 
5380–5389, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b02220. 
[55] L.Q. Flagg, C.G. Bischak, R.J. Quezada, J.W. Onorato, C.K. Luscombe, D. 
S. Ginger, P-type electrochemical doping can occur by cation expulsion in a high- 
performing polymer for organic electrochemical transistors, ACS Mater. Lett. 2 
(2020) 254–260, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsmaterialslett.9b00501. 
[56] L.Q. Flagg, C.G. Bischak, J.W. Onorato, R.B. Rashid, C.K. Luscombe, D.S. Ginger, 
Polymer crystallinity controls water uptake in glycol side-chain polymer organic 
electrochemical transistors, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141 (2019) 4345–4354, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jacs.8b12640. 
[57] J.T. Friedlein, R.R. McLeod, J. Rivnay, Device physics of organic electrochemical 
transistors, Org. Electron. 63 (2018) 398–414, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
orgel.2018.09.010. 
[58] A. Savva, C. Cendra, A. Giugni, B. Torre, J. Surgailis, D. Ohayon, A. Giovannitti, 
I. McCulloch, E. Di Fabrizio, A. Salleo, J. Rivnay, S. Inal, Influence of water on the 
performance of organic electrochemical transistors, Chem. Mater. 31 (2019) 
927–937, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335. 
[59] A.A. Szumska, I.P. Maria, L.Q. Flagg, A. Savva, J. Surgailis, B.D. Paulsen, D. Moia, 
X. Chen, S. Griggs, J.T. Mefford, R.B. Rashid, A. Marks, S. Inal, D.S. Ginger, 
A. Giovannitti, J. Nelson, Reversible electrochemical charging of n-type 
conjugated polymer electrodes in aqueous electrolytes, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143 
(2021) 14795–14805, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c06713. 
[60] A. Giovannitti, K.J. Thorley, C.B. Nielsen, J. Li, M.J. Donahue, G.G. Malliaras, 
J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Redox-stability of alkoxy-BDT copolymers and their use 
for organic bioelectronic devices, Adv. Funct. Mater. 28 (2018), 1706325, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201706325. 
[61] L. Guan, L. Yu, G.Z. Chen, Capacitive and non-capacitive faradaic charge storage, 
Electrochim. Acta 206 (2016) 464–478, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
electacta.2016.01.213. 
[62] E. Mitraka, M. Gryszel, M. Vagin, M.J. Jafari, A. Singh, M. Warczak, M. Mitrakas, 
M. Berggren, T. Ederth, I. Zozoulenko, X. Crispin, E.D. Glowacki, Electrocatalytic 
production of hydrogen peroxide with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) 
electrodes, Adv. Sustainable Syst. 3 (2019), 1800110, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adsu.201800110. 
[63] R. Kerr, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, M. Forsyth, B. Winther-Jensen, Influence of the 
polymerization method on the oxygen reduction reaction pathway on PEDOT, 
ECS Electrochem. Lett. 2 (2013) F29–F31, https://doi.org/10.1149/2.010303eel. 
[64] H.W. Kim, V.J. Bukas, H. Park, S. Park, K.M. Diederichsen, J. Lim, Y.H. Cho, 
J. Kim, W. Kim, T.H. Han, J. Voss, A.C. Luntz, B.D. McCloskey, Mechanisms of 
two-electron and four-electron electrochemical oxygen reduction reactions at 
nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide, ACS Catal. 10 (2019) 852–863, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.9b04106. 
[65] A. Giovannitti, R.B. Rashid, Q. Thiburce, B.D. Paulsen, C. Cendra, K. Thorley, 
D. Moia, J.T. Mefford, D. Hanifi, D. Weiyuan, M. Moser, A. Salleo, J. Nelson, 
I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, Energetic control of redox-active polymers toward safe 
organic bioelectronic materials, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020), e1908047, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adma.201908047. 
[66] E.A. Schafer, R. Wu, D. Meli, J. Tropp, M. Moser, I. McCulloch, B.D. Paulsen, 
J. Rivnay, Sources and mechanism of degradation in p-type thiophene-based 
organic electrochemical transistors, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 4 (2022) 
1391–1404, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.1c01171. 
[67] Y. Liang, Z. Chen, Y. Jing, Y. Rong, A. Facchetti, Y. Yao, Heavily n-dopable pi- 
conjugated redox polymers with ultrafast energy storage capability, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 137 (2015) 4956–4959, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5b02290. 
[68] A. Giovannitti, I.P. Maria, D. Hanifi, M.J. Donahue, D. Bryant, K.J. Barth, B. 
E. Makdah, A. Savva, D. Moia, M. Zetek, P.R.F. Barnes, O.G. Reid, S. Inal, 
G. Rumbles, G.G. Malliaras, J. Nelson, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, The role of the 
side chain on the performance of N-type conjugated polymers in aqueous 
electrolytes, Chem. Mater. 30 (2018) 2945–2953, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
chemmater.8b00321. 
[69] D. Moia, A. Giovannitti, A.A. Szumska, I.P. Maria, E. Rezasoltani, M. Sachs, 
M. Schnurr, P.R.F. Barnes, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, Design and evaluation of 
conjugated polymers with polar side chains as electrode materials for 
electrochemical energy storage in aqueous electrolytes, Energy Environ. Sci. 12 
(2019) 1349–1357, https://doi.org/10.1039/c8ee03518k. 
[70] Y. Wang, E. Zeglio, H. Liao, J. Xu, F. Liu, Z. Li, I.P. Maria, D. Mawad, A. Herland, 
I. McCulloch, W. Yue, Hybrid alkyl–ethylene glycol side chains enhance substrate 
adhesion and operational stability in accumulation mode organic electrochemical 
transistors, Chem. Mater. 31 (2019) 9797–9806, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
chemmater.9b03798. 
[71] I.P. Maria, B.D. Paulsen, A. Savva, D. Ohayon, R. Wu, R. Hallani, A. Basu, W. Du, 
T.D. Anthopoulos, S. Inal, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, A. Giovannitti, The effect of 
alkyl spacers on the mixed ionic-electronic conduction properties of N-type 
polymers, Adv. Funct. Mater. 31 (2021), 2008718, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adfm.202008718. 
[72] I.P. Maria, S. Griggs, R.B. Rashid, B.D. Paulsen, J. Surgailis, K. Thorley, V.N. Le, 
G.T. Harrison, C. Combe, R. Hallani, A. Giovannitti, A.F. Paterson, S. Inal, 
J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Enhancing the backbone coplanarity of n-type 
copolymers for higher electron mobility and stability in organic electrochemical 
transistors, Chem. Mater. 34 (2022) 8593–8602, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
chemmater.2c01552. 
[73] J. Mun, J. Kang, Y. Zheng, S. Luo, H.C. Wu, N. Matsuhisa, J. Xu, G.N. Wang, 
Y. Yun, G. Xue, J.B. Tok, Z. Bao, Conjugated carbon cyclic nanorings as additives 
for intrinsically stretchable semiconducting polymers, Adv. Mater. 31 (2019), 
e1903912, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201903912. 
[74] J. Mun, J. Kang, Y. Zheng, S. Luo, Y. Wu, H. Gong, J.-C. Lai, H.-C. Wu, G. Xue, J. 
B.-H. Tok, Z. Bao, F4-TCNQ as an additive to impart stretchable semiconductors 
with high mobility and stability, Adv. Electron. Mater. 6 (2020), 2000251, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.202000251. 
[75] Y. Xiong, L. Ye, A. Gadisa, Q. Zhang, J.J. Rech, W. You, H. Ade, Revealing the 
impact of F4-TCNQ as additive on morphology and performance of high- 
efficiency nonfullerene organic solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2018), 
1806262, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201806262. 
[76] H.W. Luo, C.M. Yu, Z.T. Liu, G.X. Zhang, H. Geng, Y.P. Yi, K. Broch, Y.Y. Hu, 
A. Sadhanala, L. Jiang, P.L. Qi, Z.X. Cai, H. Sirringhaus, D.Q. Zhang, Remarkable 
enhancement of charge carrier mobility of conjugated polymer field-effect 
transistors upon incorporating an ionic additive, Sci. Adv. 2 (2016), e1600076, 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1600076. 
[77] M. Nikolka, I. Nasrallah, B. Rose, M.K. Ravva, K. Broch, A. Sadhanala, D. Harkin, 
J. Charmet, M. Hurhangee, A. Brown, S. Illig, P. Too, J. Jongman, I. McCulloch, 
J.-L. Bredas, H. Sirringhaus, High operational and environmental stability of high- 
mobility conjugated polymer field-effect transistors through the use of molecular 
additives, Nat. Mater. 16 (2017) 356–362, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4785. 
[78] S. Liu, Y. Guan, Y. Sheng, Y. Hu, Y. Rong, A. Mei, H. Han, A review on additives 
for halide perovskite solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater. 10 (2019), 1902492, https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201902492. 
[79] D. Zhao, J. Huang, R. Qin, G. Yang, J. Yu, Efficient visible-near-infrared hybrid 
perovskite:PbS quantum dot photodetectors fabricated using an antisolvent 
additive solution process, Adv. Opt. Mater. 6 (2018), 1800979, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adom.201800979. 
[80] J. Hu, K. Chen, C. Li, Nanostructured Li-rich fluoride coated by ionic liquid as 
high ion-conductivity solid electrolyte additive to suppress dendrite growth at Li 
metal anode, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018) 34322–34331, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsami.8b12579. 
[81] M. ElMahmoudy, S. Inal, A. Charrier, I. Uguz, G.G. Malliaras, S. Sanaur, Tailoring 
the electrochemical and mechanical properties of PEDOT:PSS films for 
bioelectronics, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 302 (2017), 1600497, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/mame.201600497. 
[82] A. Håkansson, S. Han, S. Wang, J. Lu, S. Braun, M. Fahlman, M. Berggren, 
X. Crispin, S. Fabiano, Effect of (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane (GOPS) on 
the electrical properties of PEDOT:PSS films, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
55 (2017) 814–820, https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.24331. 
[83] T.C. Hidalgo Castillo, M. Moser, C. Cendra, P.D. Nayak, A. Salleo, I. McCulloch, 
S. Inal, Simultaneous performance and stability improvement of a p-type organic 
electrochemical transistor through additives, Chem. Mater. 34 (2022) 
6723–6733, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c00632. 
[84] J. Rivnay, S. Inal, B.A. Collins, M. Sessolo, E. Stavrinidou, X. Strakosas, 
C. Tassone, D.M. Delongchamp, G.G. Malliaras, Structural control of mixed ionic 
and electronic transport in conducting polymers, Nat. Commun. 7 (2016), 11287, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11287. 
[85] X. Wu, A. Surendran, J. Ko, O. Filonik, E.M. Herzig, P. Muller-Buschbaum, W. 
L. Leong, Ionic-liquid doping enables high transconductance, fast response time, 
and high ion sensitivity in organic electrochemical transistors, Adv. Mater. 31 
(2019), e1805544, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201805544. 
[86] J. Ko, X. Wu, A. Surendran, B.T. Muhammad, W.L. Leong, Self-healable organic 
electrochemical transistor with high transconductance, fast response, and long- 
term stability, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 (2020) 33979–33988, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsami.0c07913. 
[87] S.T. Keene, T.P.A. van der Pol, D. Zakhidov, C.H.L. Weijtens, R.A.J. Janssen, 
A. Salleo, Y. van de Burgt, Enhancement-mode PEDOT:PSS organic 
electrochemical transistors using molecular de-doping, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020), 
e2000270, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202000270. 
[88] A.F. Paterson, A. Savva, S. Wustoni, L. Tsetseris, B.D. Paulsen, H. Faber, A. 
H. Emwas, X. Chen, G. Nikiforidis, T.C. Hidalgo, M. Moser, I.P. Maria, J. Rivnay, 
I. McCulloch, T.D. Anthopoulos, S. Inal, Water stable molecular n-doping 
produces organic electrochemical transistors with high transconductance and 
record stability, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 3004, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41467-020-16648-0. 
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Organic Electronics 117 (2023) 106777
15
[89] J. Chen, W. Huang, D. Zheng, Z. Xie, X. Zhuang, D. Zhao, Y. Chen, N. Su, H. Chen, 
R.M. Pankow, Z. Gao, J. Yu, X. Guo, Y. Cheng, J. Strzalka, X. Yu, T.J. Marks, 
A. Facchetti, Highly stretchable organic electrochemical transistors with strain- 
resistant performance, Nat. Mater. 21 (2022) 564–571, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41563-022-01239-9. 
[90] L. Huang, Z. Wang, J. Chen, B. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Huang, L. Chi, T.J. Marks, 
A. Facchetti, Porous semiconducting polymers enable high-performance 
electrochemical transistors, Adv. Mater. 33 (2021), e2007041, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.202007041. 
[91] Y. Yao, W. Huang, J. Chen, G. Wang, H. Chen, X. Zhuang, Y. Ying, J. Ping, T. 
J. Marks, A. Facchetti, Flexible complementary circuits operating at sub-0.5 V via 
hybrid organic-inorganic electrolyte-gated transistors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 
A. 118 (2021), e2111790118, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2111790118. 
[92] G. Zhu, J. Chen, J. Duan, H. Liao, X. Zhu, Z. Li, I. McCulloch, W. Yue, Fluorinated 
alcohol-processed N-type organic electrochemical transistor with high 
performance and enhanced stability, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14 (2022) 
43586–43596, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c13310. 
[93] M. Hamedi, A. Herland, R.H. Karlsson, O. Ingan¨as, Electrochemical devices made 
from conducting nanowire networks self-assembled from amyloid fibrils and 
alkoxysulfonate PEDOT, Nano Lett. 8 (2008) 1736–1740, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/nl0808233. 
[94] S. Inal, J. Rivnay, P. Leleux, M. Ferro, M. Ramuz, J.C. Brendel, M.M. Schmidt, 
M. Thelakkat, G.G. Malliaras, A high transconductance accumulation mode 
electrochemical transistor, Adv. Mater. 26 (2014) 7450–7455, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.201403150. 
[95] E. Zeglio, M. Vagin, C. Musumeci, F.N. Ajjan, R. Gabrielsson, X.T. Trinh, N.T. Son, 
A. Maziz, N. Solin, O. Ingan¨as, Conjugated polyelectrolyte blends for 
electrochromic and electrochemical transistor devices, Chem. Mater. 27 (2015) 
6385–6393, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b02501. 
[96] P.K. Johansson, D. Jullesson, A. Elfwing, S.I. Liin, C. Musumeci, E. Zeglio, 
F. Elinder, N. Solin, O. Inganas, Electronic polymers in lipid membranes, Sci. Rep. 
5 (2015), 11242, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep11242. 
[97] E. Zeglio, M.M. Schmidt, M. Thelakkat, R. Gabrielsson, N. Solin, O. Ingan¨as, 
Conjugated polyelectrolyte blend as photonic probe of biomembrane 
organization, ChemistrySelect 1 (2016) 4340–4344, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
slct.201600920. 
[98] S. Dai, Y. Dai, Z. Zhao, F. Xia, Y. Li, Y. Liu, P. Cheng, J. Strzalka, S. Li, N. Li, Q. Su, 
S. Wai, W. Liu, C. Zhang, R. Zhao, J.J. Yang, R. Stevens, J. Xu, J. Huang, S. Wang, 
Intrinsically stretchable neuromorphic devices for on-body processing of health 
data with artificial intelligence, Matter 5 (2022) 3375–3390, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.matt.2022.07.016. 
[99] S.M. Kim, C.H. Kim, Y. Kim, N. Kim, W.J. Lee, E.H. Lee, D. Kim, S. Park, K. Lee, 
J. Rivnay, M.H. Yoon, Influence of PEDOT:PSS crystallinity and composition on 
electrochemical transistor performance and long-term stability, Nat. Commun. 9 
(2018) 3858, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06084-6. 
[100] J.H. Kim, Z. Ahmad, Y. Kim, W. Kim, H. Ahn, J.-S. Lee, M.-H. Yoon, Decoupling 
critical parameters in large-range crystallinity-controlled polypyrrole-based high- 
performance organic electrochemical transistors, Chem. Mater. 32 (2020) 
8606–8618, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c02936. 
[101] X. Wu, A. Surendran, M. Moser, S. Chen, B.T. Muhammad, I.P. Maria, 
I. McCulloch, W.L. Leong, Universal spray-deposition process for scalable, high- 
performance, and stable organic electrochemical transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 12 (2020) 20757–20764, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c04776. 
[102] D.A. Koutsouras, F. Torricelli, P.W.M. Blom, Submicron vertical channel organic 
electrochemical transistors with ultrahigh transconductance, Adv. Electron. 
Mater. (2022), 2200868, https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.202200868. 
[103] Y. Yan, Q. Chen, X. Wu, X. Wang, E. Li, Y. Ke, Y. Liu, H. Chen, T. Guo, High- 
performance organic electrochemical transistors with nanoscale channel length 
and their application to artificial synapse, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 (2020) 
49915–49925, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c15553. 
[104] W. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Yao, D. Zheng, X. Ji, L.W. Feng, D. Moore, N.R. Glavin, 
M. Xie, Y. Chen, R.M. Pankow, A. Surendran, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, L. Bai, J. Rivnay, 
J. Ping, X. Guo, Y. Cheng, T.J. Marks, A. Facchetti, Vertical organic 
electrochemical transistors for complementary circuits, Nature 613 (2023) 
496–502, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05592-2. 
[105] H.Y. Wu, C.Y. Yang, Q. Li, N.B. Kolhe, X. Strakosas, M.A. Stoeckel, Z. Wu, W. Jin, 
M. Savvakis, R. Kroon, D. Tu, H.Y. Woo, M. Berggren, S.A. Jenekhe, S. Fabiano, 
Influence of molecular weight on the organic electrochemical transistor 
performance of ladder-type conjugated polymers, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022), 
e2106235, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202106235. 
M. Xie et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

