ARTICLES
PUBLISHED ONLINE: 4 AUGUST 2013 | DOI: 10.1038/NMAT3722
A general relationship between disorder,
aggregation and charge transport in
conjugated polymers
Rodrigo Noriega1†‡, Jonathan Rivnay2†‡, Koen Vandewal2, Felix P. V. Koch3, Natalie Stingelin3,4,
Paul Smith3, Michael F. Toney5 and Alberto Salleo2*
Conjugated polymer chains have many degrees of conformational freedom and interact weakly with each other, resulting
in complex microstructures in the solid state. Understanding charge transport in such systems, which have amorphous and
ordered phases exhibiting varying degrees of order, has proved difﬁcult owing to the contribution of electronic processes
at various length scales. The growing technological appeal of these semiconductors makes such fundamental knowledge
extremely important for materials and process design. We propose a uniﬁed model of how charge carriers travel in conjugated
polymer ﬁlms. We show that in high-molecular-weight semiconducting polymers the limiting charge transport step is trapping
caused by lattice disorder, and that short-range intermolecular aggregation is sufﬁcient for efﬁcient long-range charge
transport. This generalization explains the seemingly contradicting high performance of recently reported, poorly ordered
polymers and suggests molecular design strategies to further improve the performance of future generations of organic
electronic materials.
S
ystematic progress in materials engineering is best guided by
a fundamental understanding of the impact of structure—
from atomic to microstructural and mesoscopic scales—on
functional properties. Structural control at the appropriate length
scales combined with knowledge of basic physical processes have
given rise to engineering breakthroughs and rational design of new
materials. For instance, the understanding of how chain alignment
and degree of crystallinity control the mechanical properties of
polymers led to the development of fibres with specific strengths
exceeding that of steel. Recently, the potential to combine low-cost
manufacturing and mechanical robustness while simultaneously
engineering optoelectronic properties has spurred great interest
in semiconducting polymers1. Consequently, devices based on
organic semiconductors have reached significant milestones, such
as ∼10% solar power conversion efficiencies2 and electron and hole
mobilities exceeding 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 (refs 3,4). In contrast with other
semiconductors, there is no commonly accepted, widely applicable
model of charge transport in semiconducting polymers. Depending
on the materials, models used to describe charge transport
in organic semiconductors include band transport, hopping or
multiple trapping and release1. Except for dynamic localization5,
most of these models have been adapted from the study of
inorganic semiconductors, where atoms are strongly localized on
their equilibrium lattice sites. In contrast, conjugated polymers
are weakly bonded macromolecules with numerous degrees of
conformational freedom, resulting in microstructures varying from
completely amorphous to crystalline. Typical crystalline packing
in semicrystalline conjugated polymers involves ordered lamellae
1Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA, 2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford,
California 94305, USA, 3Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, Zurich 8093, Switzerland, 4Department of Materials and Centre of Plastic Electronics,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK, 5Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL), SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park,
California 94025, USA. †These authors contributed equally to this work. ‡Present addresses: Department of Chemistry, University of California Berkeley,
94720, USA (R.N.); Department of Bioelectronics, Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Mines, CMP-EMSE, MOC, 13541 Gardanne, France (J.R.).
*e-mail: asalleo@stanford.edu
composed of co-facially stacked molecules that exhibit strong
π-orbital overlap (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Based on the observation that inorganic polycrystalline semi-
conductors often transport charge better than their amorphous
analogues, much of the progress in the design of semiconducting
polymers was made by pursuing polycrystalline-like microstruc-
tures. However, recent polymers based on increasingly complex
monomers3,6–13 seem to refute old paradigms exploited to attain
high mobility, such as those involving regioregularity, texture, or
crystallinity10,14–16. More significantly, highly disordered or even
seemingly amorphous polymers now perform as well as semicrys-
talline materials4,10.
The interplay between microstructure and electrical properties
in conjugated polymers is far from being clearly articulated.
This difficulty originates from these materials’ intermediate
location on the order–disorder scale. Materials that are between
(poly)crystalline and amorphous are, in general, poorly understood.
In this manuscript, we place in a common context both new
data and literature data by applying characterization principles
that allow a ranking of conjugated polymers according to
their degree of structural disorder. All materials for which
there exist relevant data, when processed into their highest-
performing microstructure, exhibit a large amount of lattice
disorder irrespective of their chemistry or overall degree of
crystallinity. Structural disorder is linked to electronic localization
within molecular stacks and gives rise to electronic traps, which
limit charge transport in high-mobility conjugated polymers.
This powerful simplification reveals a general structure–property
1038
NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 12 | NOVEMBER 2013 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

NATURE MATERIALS DOI: 10.1038/NMAT3722
ARTICLES
a
b
c
Figure 1 | Microstructure of conjugated polymer ﬁlms. a–c, Schematics of the microstructure of a semicrystalline polymer ﬁlm, for example P3HT (a),
disordered aggregates (b) and a completely amorphous ﬁlm (c). Note the coexistence of ordered (darker shadowed areas) and spaghetti-like amorphous
regions. This microstructure is similar to the concept of fringed micelles. If the molecular weight is high enough and there is a large enough density of
ordered material, long polymer chains (highlighted in red) can connect ordered regions without a signiﬁcant loss of conjugation, greatly improving charge
transport.
relationship relating order at the segmental level to transport at the
device scale. A survey of over ten years of literature data confirms
the generality of these concepts.
Charge transport and the importance of aggregates
The
microstructure
of
high-molecular-weight
poly(3-hexyl-
thiophene), P3HT—a model semicrystalline conjugated polymer—
exhibits a continuous variation in order parameters17,18 where
semi-ordered and amorphous ‘spaghetti-like’ regions coexist;
long polymer chains are responsible for the connectivity between
adjacent crystallites (Fig. 1a)19. Semi-ordered regions may be
comprised of large domains with three-dimensional long-range
periodicity (crystallites) or smaller domains with short-range
ordering of a few molecular units (aggregates, which may also be
identified as fringed micelles; Fig. 1b).
In such a heterogeneous microstructure, the ordered regions
are largely responsible for charge transport because charges
must overcome an energy barrier to move from ordered to
amorphous regions. Indeed, owing to its reduced conjugation
length, the amorphous fraction of regio-regular P3HT (RR-
P3HT) has a larger bandgap compared to the aggregates and
we find no evidence of energetic overlap of electronic states
in amorphous and ordered P3HT regions (Supplementary Fig.
S2). This energetic offset hinders carrier migration into the
amorphous regions, and makes it energetically and statistically
favourable for charges at the order/disorder interface to migrate
back into the ordered regions. Because, in principle, this offset
could be reduced by polaronic effects, we test our hypothesis
by studying blends of regio-random P3HT (RRa-P3HT) with
controlled amounts of RR-P3HT nanofibrils (see Methods)20. Even
for a low concentration of aggregates (∼10% by volume), at
current densities comparable to those encountered in electronic
devices, the electroluminescence spectra resemble that of RR-
P3HT (Fig. 2, and Supplementary Figs S3 and S4). Consequently,
transported charges recombine within fibrils. Thus, at realistic
current densities, charge carriers remain confined in the ordered
regions of a heterogeneous microstructure when such ordered
regions are spatially close enough to form an interconnected
network through tie-molecules.
This conclusion may be challenged by the oft-encountered
assumption, based on calorimetric measurements, that semicrys-
talline polymer films have a low degree of crystallinity. However,
these measurements systematically underestimate the amount of
ordered material (Supplementary Fig. S5). In P3HT, we assess
that such an underestimation is approximately a factor of two,
with the aggregate volume fraction in P3HT films near ∼40–50%
(refs 21,22). Hence, in high-mobility polymers the fraction of
the film comprised of ordered material is sufficiently large to be
interconnected by bridging polymer chains, creating a network that
sustains efficient charge transport. Such networks of crystallites
have been previously observed in conjugated polymers21,23.
The nature of the connections between aggregates is poorly
understood and should be the subject of further study. Nevertheless,
we are able to make a few qualitative considerations. Polymer chains
are semiflexible24,25—that is, rigid at length scales comparable
to their persistence length and flexible at larger length scales.
If the spacing between neighbouring crystallites is only a few
persistence lengths, a chain that exits one ordered region and enters
1.0
a
b
1.0
EL:1 mA
PL
EL:2 mA
EL: 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 7.5, 10, 15, 
20, 30 mA
RR
RRa
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.0
550
600
650
700
Wavelength (nm)
750
800
850
Normalized intensity
Normalized intensity
Figure 2 | Photo-physical characterization of pre-aggregated P3HT
ﬁbril:amorphous-blend ﬁlms. a, Reference electroluminescence spectra
from pure RR and RRa P3HT. Vertical dashed lines are the
electroluminescence peak positions for the amorphous, and 0-0, 0-1
aggregate transitions of the pristine ﬁlms, respectively.
b, Photoluminescence spectrum (dotted) showing the signature of
aggregated and amorphous material, along with electroluminescence
spectra for increasing values of current in the devices made with ﬁlms of
10% pre-aggregated RR-P3HT. Unlike the photoluminescence spectrum,
the low-current (typical of normal device application) electroluminescence
spectra show only emission from aggregates, indicating that it is due
exclusively to recombination within the aggregates and not to exciton
energy transfer to the aggregates before recombination. Only at large
current densities does the blue-shifted spectral feature from RRa-P3HT
appear, indicating emission from the disordered matrix.
NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 12 | NOVEMBER 2013 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
1039
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

ARTICLES
NATURE MATERIALS DOI: 10.1038/NMAT3722
104
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
103
g = 0.5%
g = 2%
g = 5%
g = 10%
DOS
LRMS/d
102
101
102
101
100
0
2
4
E/t0
E/t0
E/t0
E/t0
E/t0
6
8
104
103
102
101
0
2
4
6
8
104
103
102
101
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
E/t0
0
2
4
6
8
E/t0
102
101
100
102
101
100
102
101
kT
100
0
2
4
6
8
104
103
102
101
0
2
4
6
8
E/t0
0
2
4
6
8
Figure 3 | Modelling of the electronic effects of energetic and structural disorder. a–d, DOS of 1D stacks with different amounts of lattice disorder (g) and
Gaussian energetic disorder (of width σ). We show the cases of an almost perfect lattice (g = 0.5%; a), a lattice with a small amount of disorder
(g = 2%; b), a moderately paracrystalline lattice (g = 5%; c), and a strongly disordered lattice (g = 10%; d). The widths of the probability distribution of
on-site energies increase as indicated by the arrow in a in the sequence 0, 50, 100 and 200 meV. The energy coordinate is normalized by the inter-site
transfer integral at equilibrium, t0 = 150 meV. e–h, Localization length (that is, the root mean square spatial extent) for each of the eigenstates of the
disordered Hamiltonian, normalized by the inter-site distance d, plotted versus the state’s energy. No energetic disorder was included, and the amounts of
paracrystalline disorder are the same as a–d. The box depicts the localization length of states in a perfect stack (red horizontal line: complete
delocalization) and the band edge in the absence of disorder (dashed line). States with a normalized localization length <2 are considered completely
localized. The magnitude of kT at room temperature is indicated in h.
another should not suffer large bends in its backbone and should
retain significant conjugation. Such a chain segment, although
not part of any aggregate, provides an efficient charge transport
pathway between ordered regions and acts as a tie-molecule (see
Supplementary Text). Hence, in high-molecular-weight polymers,
transport occurs through an interconnected network of ordered
regions. The amorphous fraction of the film does not participate in
transport; therefore, the structural properties of the ordered regions
govern charge transport in the film. Local mobility measurements
in high-molecular-weight P3HT confirm that mobility is limited by
transport in these nanoscale aggregates26, and scanning-probe field-
effect measurements show no barrier for charge transport between
aggregates27. These and our findings demonstrate experimentally
that the electrical connection between aggregates is not a rate-
limiting step in the transport process for conjugated polymers of
sufficiently high molecular weight.
Effect of disorder on the electronic structure of aggregates
As charges in semicrystalline polymers reside in the ordered regions
of the film, the effect of structural imperfections in these regions on
their electronic properties must be understood. Structural disorder
gives rise to energetic disorder—that is, variations in the energy
levels across the material—and also affects intermolecular charge
transfer integrals. Disorder-induced localization is a well-known
occurrence in condensed matter28,29. Semiconducting polymers,
however, require the understanding of charge transport in
intermediate disorder regimes. Structural disorder in an imperfect
crystal is described by the paracrystallinity model as random
fluctuations in lattice spacings. This disorder is quantitatively
measured by the paracrystallinity parameter g, which is the standard
deviation of local static lattice fluctuations normalized by the
average value of the lattice spacing30. Interestingly, paracrystallinity
describes the local structure of amorphous silicon more accurately
than previously accepted models31.
The strongest electronic coupling in a polymer is along its back-
bone, but intermolecular transport is necessary in a typical device as
no individual chain can provide macroscopic transport. Disorder in
the π-stacks of organic semiconductors is most relevant to transport
because this direction supports rate-limiting intermolecular charge
transfers. Paracrystallinity in the π-stacks causes the creation
of deep tails of electronic states extending into the materials’
bandgap with a characteristic energy breadth proportional to g 2
(ref. 32). To compare the effects of structural and energetic disorder
on electronic structure, we use a tight-binding model where an
aggregate is modelled as a 1D π-stack of molecules (Methods and
Supplementary Text). Including variations in the molecular energy
levels as well as fluctuations in the intermolecular charge transfer
integral yields results useful for qualitative comparisons.
In the case of negligible paracrystallinity, the density of states
(DOS) of the 1D π-stack depends on the amount of on-site
disorder generating a Gaussian tail of states extending into the
bandgap (Fig. 3a). Typical π-stacks of conjugated polymers exhibit
moderate amounts of paracrystalline disorder (g ≥5%; see below).
Under these conditions, the DOS of the aggregate is hardly
affected by on-site disorder and is determined by the amount of
paracrystallinity (Fig. 3c,d).
Our model neglects dynamic effects, which were included
in a recent study33
of charge transport in poly(2,5-bis(3-
tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2,-b]thiophene) (PBTTT), where
the authors suggested that dynamic fluctuations and polarization-
induced charge stabilization lead to further DOS broadening.
Fluctuations of electronic couplings, however, occur on a very
fast timescale and must be time-averaged before studying charge
transfer
events. Although our treatment includes no time
1040
NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 12 | NOVEMBER 2013 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

NATURE MATERIALS DOI: 10.1038/NMAT3722
ARTICLES
dependence, static cumulative disorder is significant in these
materials.
Dynamic disorder will induce further fluctuations
around the static positions, but these refinements do not qualita-
tively alter our conclusions.
The spatial extent of the calculated wavefunctions for the
disordered stack (Fig. 3e–h) shows that disorder-induced states that
lie deeper into the DOS tail are increasingly localized. Even states
within the originally ‘delocalized band’ become more localized with
increasing paracrystallinity. In the limit of large positional disorder
(g ∼10%), the distinction between band and tail disappears: a
single broad distribution of localized states with a monotonically
decreasing DOS extends into the bandgap, reproducing well-known
results of electronic structure theory of amorphous materials34,35.
In the intermediate paracrystallinity regime (g ∼3–7%) we observe
a coexistence of localized and delocalized states, indicating that in
paracrystalline aggregates charge is transported by a mechanism
where mobile charge is temporarily trapped in localized states, akin
to multiple trapping and release1,36.
Measuring paracrystallinity in conjugated polymers
Using X-ray diffraction peak-shape analysis (details in Supplemen-
tary Text) we quantify paracrystallinity in polymer crystallites to
determine whether this disorder dominates their DOS. In PBTTT,
a polymer considered to exhibit an exceptional degree of order37,
we find a highly anisotropic lattice disorder. In the lamellar stack-
ing direction, glam = 2.6% owing to side chain interdigitation38,39.
Long-range lamellar order however does not translate to order in
the π-stacks, where gπ =7.3%, a value close to that of an amorphous
stack. Thus, we conclude that the DOS of a PBTTT π-stack is
dictated by paracrystalline disorder.
The low amount of paracrystalline disorder measured in a small
molecule film and its small anisotropy (Fig. 4 and Supplementary
Table S1) shows that organic solids are not inherently disordered
in spite of their weak intermolecular forces. Conversely, the
distinguishing feature of polymers is the pronounced disorder in
the π-stacking direction. To observe this transition, we use thin
films of P3HT with chain lengths of 8 to >2,000 monomers (Mn
from 1.33 to >350 kg mol−1), and perform single-peak estimations
of the π-stacking disorder (Supplementary Text and Figs S6, S7).
When starting from an oligomer and adding monomers to form a
high-molecular-weight polymer, paracrystallinity in the π-stacking
direction is initially low (comparable to that in polycrystalline films
of small molecules) and rises until the incremental effect of adding
monomers vanishes and paracrystallinity becomes independent of
molecule length (Fig. 4a).
Although P3HT represents a model system, we also explored
paracrystallinity in the π-stacking direction of other high-mobility
polymers. We collect π-stacking data from over 30 literature
cases (Fig. 4a), where conjugated polymers were processed with
common solvents and casting techniques. It is apparent that
high-molecular-weight semicrystalline polymer semiconductors
exhibit a surprisingly common level of minimum lattice disorder
(g ∼6–8%). In the direction where intermolecular charge transfer
occurs, all high-mobility high-molecular-weight polymers are
closer to being amorphous (g ∼10–20%) than crystalline (g <1%),
irrespective of the degree of order in the lamellar stacking direction.
The universal dependence of paracrystalline disorder on molecular
weight indicates that chain folding and entanglements are probable
sources of defects40. Side-chain conformational disorder may also
disrupt the backbone packing arrangement, leading to an intrinsic
level of disorder common to all conjugated polymers.
A simultaneous comparison of the effect of molecular weight
on disorder and on mobility (Fig. 4) is a strong indication that
charge transport is linked to lattice disorder. When the molecular
weight of P3HT is high enough such that its lattice disorder
becomes independent of chain length, the carrier mobility is also
0
0
100
10¬2
10¬4
10¬6
Mobility,   FET (cm2 V¬1 s¬1)
TIPS-Pn, full fit
5
10
Paracrystallinity estimate, ~g (%)
15
100
200
Degree of polymerization
300
1,000
MW study
MW study
Si-PCPDTTBT (r)
P(NDI-T2) (s)
CDT-BTZ (t)
PII2T [C, Si] (h)
DPP-BT [C, Se] (i)
(l),
(m),
(o)
(p)
(q)
(n),
(a)
Anneal study
full fit,
PCPDTBT (d)
PTB1(f)
PDVT(g)
PII2T [C, Si] (h)
DPP-BT [C, Se] (i)
PT(MEEM) (j)
BBL∗ (k)
P(NDI-T2) (e)
(b)
P3HT
P3HT
PBTTT
PQT (c)
(a)
1,500
0
100
200
Degree of polymerization
300
1,000 1,500
μ
a
b
Figure 4 | Chain length effects on paracrystallinity and charge transport.
a, The π-stacking paracrystallinity in ﬁlms of polymeric semiconductors of
different molecular weight (MW), plotted as a function of degree of
polymerization. Semicrystalline materials (P3HT, PBTTT, PQT) are shown in
shades of red. Poorly ordered high performing materials are shown in black.
Others are shown in grey. Open symbols are estimates, solid symbols are
derived from a full analysis. As a comparison, cumulative disorder in
polycrystalline triisopropylsilyl pentacene (TIPS-Pn) is far smaller than that
of PBTTT and, importantly, shows signiﬁcantly less anisotropy
(Supplementary Table S1). b, Mobility as a function of molecular weight for
a variety of semiconducting polymers. P3HT is shown in red with different
symbols referring to different studies. Other high-performing materials are
shown in black. For the complete list of references see Supplementary Text.
remarkably independent of chain length. The link between these
two fundamentally different properties is particularly striking, as
the turn-over point is the same for both (chains with 50–100
monomers for P3HT) and agrees with recent yield and mobility
measurements of photogenerated charges41. Our findings remain
valid, irrespective of whether interface or bulk measurements are
considered (see Supplementary Text). Similar improvements in
mobility with increasing molecular weight have been observed
in other polymers11,42.
The effect of molecular weight on charge transport in semicrys-
talline polymers is subject to an intrinsic and general trade-off. Long
chains provide electrical connectivity between ordered regions,
allowing efficient charge transport, but also result in higher struc-
tural disorder. In the low-molecular-weight connectivity-limited
regime, mobility rises quickly as average chain length increases43.
Eventually, the mobility plateaus as a function of molecular weight
when enough connectivity is provided for charge to move through
the paracrystalline regions (see Supplementary Text). Thus, in
high-molecular-weight polymers charge transport is strongly en-
hanced by the connectivity of the ordered regions (crystallites and
aggregates) but limited by lattice disorder in these regions once
sufficient connectivity is established.
The spread in mobility values is significant, showing that no
single microstructural feature is entirely responsible for electronic
NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 12 | NOVEMBER 2013 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
1041
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

ARTICLES
NATURE MATERIALS DOI: 10.1038/NMAT3722
performance. Differences in morphology arise from variations
in processing conditions and polydispersity, which contribute to
the variability in charge carrier mobility. Despite these factors,
the fundamental transport-limiting mechanism and its causal
connection to paracrystallinity is preserved.
Paracrystallinity governs charge transport
In ‘classic’ (that is, designed to exhibit a noticeable degree of
crystallinity and extended π–π stacking) semicrystalline conjugated
polymers, paracrystalline disorder in the crystallites limits charge
transport via the introduction of traps. The level of lattice disorder
in the π-stacking direction measured in all high-molecular-weight
polymers corresponds to the regime where localized and delocalized
states in the aggregates coexist, giving rise to trapping-limited
transport, as experimentally observed in field effect transistors
(FET) and in local mobility measurements26. In FETs, the difference
in energy between the populated traps and the mobile states
manifests itself in the activation energy for transport and its
dependence on charge density (gate voltage). Hence, the greater the
disorder, the deeper the traps and the larger the activation energy.
In
Fig. 5,
we
gather
activation
energies
derived
from
temperature-dependent FET measurements, and trap depth/tail
widths derived from modelling electrical transport both from
the literature and from this work. These data were collected
from samples spanning a range of mobility, materials purity,
device preparation, surface treatments and geometry. In spite of
such variety of materials and conditions, a consistent behaviour
emerges. Transport in common thiophene-based semicrystalline
polymers—for example, P3HT, poly[5,5′-bis(3-alkyl-2-thienyl)-2,
2′-bithiophene] (PQT), PBTTT—has an average 72 ± 24 meV
activation energy. In comparison, completely amorphous ma-
terials show a significantly higher average activation energy
∼230±100 meV. It is interesting to examine new high-performance
polymers, which do not seem to belong in either category. Examples
of these materials are copolymers based on more complex moieties,
such as naphthalene-diimides (PNDI-T2), diketopyrrolopyrroles
with sulphur and selenium (DPP-BT, DSePP-BT), and carbazoles
(PCDTBT), but also newer materials such as isoindigo copoly-
mers and indacenodithiophene-based polymers. These materials
have mobilities comparable to those of semicrystalline polymers
(µFET ∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1), but at first glance, morphologically, they
are closer to the amorphous materials family. Indeed their disorder
is higher than that of semicrystalline polymers, as evidenced by
lower diffracted intensities, fewer observable diffraction peaks,
and/or the large breadth of their π-stacking peak. These new
high-mobility polymers exhibit activation energies and trap
breadths of 76±33 meV: similar to those of ‘classic’ semicrystalline
polymers and significantly lower than the mean value observed for
amorphous conjugated polymers. Many of these new reportedly
‘amorphous’ materials have at least enough short-range order to
result in detectable diffraction in synchrotron XRD experiments
(Supplementary Fig. S8). Though polymers in this new class are
seemingly disordered, they exhibit the tell-tale signs of aggregation
in their solid-state optical absorption spectra, namely the presence
of a resolvable vibronic progression near the absorption edge22.
Short-range order in the form of aggregates is sufficient to support
efficient intermolecular charge transfer. Because charges have a
short scattering mean free path in the π-stacks—on the order of a
nanometre36—they are mostly affected by such short-range order.
Disordered crystallites larger than a scattering length bring hardly
any additional benefit for charge transport. In conjugated polymers,
crystallinity—no matter how low—is a sign that the polymer chains
have a tendency to form stacked aggregates with a paracrystallinity
that can be estimated by the width of the π-stacking XRD peak.
This collection of interconnected aggregates enables high mobilities
in high-molecular-weight polymers despite the consistently large
'Classic'
semicrystalline
Amorphous
Activation energy or trap breadth (meV)
Aggregating
PBTTT
PQT
P3HT
PSSS
PBDN
DPP-BT
SeDPP-BT
PCDTBT
F8T2
PTAA
PPVs
RRa-P3HT
Poorly
ordered
Amorphous
Semi- 
crystalline
P(NDI-T2)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Figure 5 | Activation energy for transport in semiconducting polymers.
Activation energies obtained from FET data from this work, and from the
literature (dash), as well as trap depth/tail widths derived from device
modelling (cross) for traditional classic semicrystalline materials (red),
new high performers that are found to be poorly ordered (black), and
completely amorphous materials (blue). Data (84 values for 13 different
materials) are binned by material (for the complete list of references see
Supplementary Text). The averages and standard deviations from the
respective groups are shown for semicrystalline, poorly ordered, and
amorphous materials on the right panel.
paracrystalline disorder in the π-stacking direction and weak
diffracted intensities.
Molecular stacking, even with only short-range order, makes
aggregating materials fundamentally different from truly amor-
phous polymers. Assuming an exponential dependence of the
intermolecular transfer integral t on separation x, t = t0e−βx, the
prefactor t0 and wavefunction overlap decay length (1/β) govern
the extent to which lattice disorder affects charge transport. The
newer high-mobility polymers can tolerate nanometre-scale disor-
der owing to their structure at the ångström-scale. For example,
increasing t0 by reducing the π–π stacking distance causes aggre-
gates to be electronically less sensitive to large amounts of disorder,
increasing the threshold beyond which paracrystallinity-induced
states severely affect transport. Similarly, reducing β by design-
ing materials with orbitals having larger overlaps or favourable
symmetries reduces the effect of positional disorder on charge
transport. Some of these factors are probably at work in recently
reported high-mobility polymers. The optimization of side-chains
to increase solubility leads to a reduced intermolecular π-stacking
distance in diketopyrrolopyrrole-furan and isoindigo-based poly-
mers. Using large and planar fused-ring aromatic cores increases
the overlapping area between adjacent π-stacked units, making
the aggregates less sensitive to positional disorder12,13. Therefore,
tuning the molecular design to improve packing and orbital shape,
orientation and symmetry may contribute to making transport in
aggregates—where charge is confined—less sensitive to π-stacking
disorder, thereby preserving efficient device-scale charge transport.
These considerations separate polymeric semiconductors into
two classes. In one class we have truly amorphous materials,
lacking any long-range order and characterized by broad, featureless
amorphous X-ray scattering halos. Charge transport in these truly
amorphous materials is limited by hopping between localized states
in a broad DOS. Such a transport mode is restricted to mobilities
<0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and is subject to large activation energies44. In the
second class are materials that can form interconnected aggregates
exhibiting at least short-range order, with transport in field-effect
devices described by a multiple trapping and release mechanism.
1042
NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 12 | NOVEMBER 2013 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

NATURE MATERIALS DOI: 10.1038/NMAT3722
ARTICLES
The difference between aggregating materials families is the distance
over which aggregation persists: semi-crystalline materials exhibit
relatively long range order (several to 10 s of nanometres in the π-
stacking direction as derived from the coherence length) and strong
X-ray scattering, whereas weakly scattering polymers can be ordered
in some crystallographic directions (alkyl-stacking) but remain
largely disordered in the π-stacking direction (Supplementary Fig.
S8). Even though these semi-amorphous materials are strongly
disordered in their π-stacks, their ability to form aggregates allows
locally efficient intermolecular charge transport. Such short-range
order at the segmental level is sufficiently pervasive in the thin-film
microstructures to provide effective pathways for charge transport.
Aggregating polymers of high molecular weight, whether very
weakly diffracting or truly semicrystalline, belong to the same class,
where the disorder in the intermolecular π-stacking direction is
consistently high in all conjugated polymers and induces traps in
the DOS, which are transport-limiting.
Implications for high-mobility semiconducting polymers
Understanding charge transport in conjugated semicrystalline
polymers has proved to be a challenging problem owing to the
unusual range of disorder they exhibit. These materials are not well-
ordered, yet they are not amorphous either. By bringing together
data from years of research in conjunction with new insights,
we formulate a link between the molecular- and micro-structure
of high-mobility semiconducting polymers and their macroscopic
electrical properties. These insights uncover strong similarities
within seemingly diverse families of conjugated polymers and
allow us to formulate a unified transport model. We find that,
in the π-stacking direction, the lowest observed amount of
lattice disorder in all high-performance—and necessarily high
molecular weight—polymers is unexpectedly large and remarkably
independent of material. The unifying requirement for high
carrier mobility is the presence of interconnected aggregates, even
if they are small and disordered. The key to designing high-
mobility polymers is not in increasing crystallinity but rather
in increasing their tolerance to an inevitably large amount of
disorder within the aggregates by allowing more efficient intra-
and intermolecular charge transport/transfer at the segmental level.
The fundamental relationship presented here between short-range
order in π-aggregates, aggregate connectivity, and macroscopic
charge transport provides input for the design of new optoelectronic
polymers with the potential to usher in technological successes
comparable to those obtained with high-strength polymers. More
broadly, we provide a general framework for understanding how
to take advantage of intermediate order at different length scales to
control the macroscopic properties of semicrystalline polymers, be
they optical, electrical or mechanical.
Methods
Sample preparation. Samples for structural determination and TFT measurements
were prepared on native oxide silicon and 200 nm thermal oxide silicon,
respectively. Substrates were sonicated in acetone and isopropyl alcohol before
drying with nitrogen and undergoing ultraviolet ozone treatment (20 min). Raw
materials were used as received from Merck Chemicals (TIPS-Pn, P3HT), Polyera
(N2200, and derivatives), Imperial College London (P3HT, PBTTT), and ETH
Zurich (P3HT, P3HT-oligomers). Films were spin cast from ∼10 mg ml−1 solutions
at 1,000–1,500; if used for electro-optical testing film formation was performed in
a N2 glove box (<1 ppm O2). The samples in the P3HT molecular weight series
were cast from toluene, whereas other films (TIPS-Pn, P3HT, P[NDI2OD-T2],
PBTTT) were cast from dichlorobenzene. Directional samples of PBTTT were cast
as previously described45.
Photo-physical characterization. For electroluminescence (EL) and
photoluminescence (PL) studies, we prepared solution blends of RRa-P3HT
(Mw = 90 kDa, Mn = 30 kDa) and pre-aggregated RR-P3HT (regio-regularity
∼97%, Mw = 105 kDa, Mn = 60 kDa). Starting solutions of RR- and RRa-P3HT in
dichlorobenzene (DCB, 30 mg ml−1) were dissolved at 80 ◦C overnight. To vary
the amount of aggregated material in the films, the starting solutions of RR- and
RRa-P3HT in DCB were diluted with ethylacetate (2:1 DCB:EtOAc solvent ratio)
to form the stock solutions for pre-aggregated and amorphous materials, which
were then mixed in 1:1 and 1:9 ratios. Films made from these solutions were spun
cast onto ITO/PEDOT substrates and Ca/Al electrodes were evaporated to form
devices with an area of 0.1 cm2. The EL and PL spectra for these devices were
collected using a cooled CCD camera and corrected for the spectrometer response.
PL experiments used a pump beam from a 535 nm diode laser. The driving voltage
for the diodes used in the EL measurements was provided by a Keithley 2400
power source. All these measurements and sample preparation were performed
in an inert atmosphere.
Electrical characterization. For devices used for electrical characterization,
substrates were first treated with an octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) self-assembled
monolayer before casting of semiconducting polymer. The top 100 nm Au source
and drain contacts were evaporated on dry films. Thin-film transistor devices were
characterized in a vacuum probe station evacuated to 10−4 mbar. The TFT charge
carrier mobility was extracted in the saturation regime (Vd =−60 V).
X-ray characterization. X-ray scattering was performed at the Stanford
Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) on beamlines 7-2 (high-resolution
grazing incidence), 2-1 (high-resolution specular), and 11-3 (2D scattering with an
area detector, MAR345 image plate, at grazing incidence). The incident energy was
8 keV for beamlines 7-2 and 2-1, and 12.7 keV for beamline 11-3. The diffracted
beam was collimated with 1 milliradian Soller slits for high-resolution in-plane
scattering and with two 1 mm slits for specular diffraction. For both grazing
incidence experiments, the incidence angle was slightly larger than the critical
angle, ensuring that we sampled the full film depth. All X-ray measurements were
performed in a helium-filled chamber to minimize beam damage and reduce air
scattering. Data are expressed as a function of the scattering vector q=4π∗sin(θ)/λ,
where θ is half the scattering angle and λ is the wavelength of the incident radiation.
Here, qxy (qz) is the component of the scattering vector parallel (perpendicular) to
the substrate. Only high-resolution measurements were employed for extraction
of peak parameters and analysis of paracrystalline disorder. Details of the peak
shape analysis, and resulting estimates and their justification can be found in the
Supplementary Information and in ref. 46.
Simulations. The model from ref. 32 is simplified to a one-dimensional disordered
stack made up of Ns sites. A tight-binding Hamiltonian is employed to describe
transport through this system, with on-site energies εi and nearest neighbour
transfer integrals ti. In the matrix form of the Hamiltonian, the main diagonal
reflects the on-site energies and the off-diagonal terms reflect inter-site couplings.
To first order, we treat the observed fluctuation in lattice parameter within
the crystalline regions only as a distribution of intermolecular separations,
neglecting details of molecular orientation and correlations. Energetic disorder
was introduced by selecting the on-site energies from a probability distribution
of a given width; structural disorder is modelled by varying the coupling between
neighbours as ti = t0e−βxi, where the bond fluctuations xi due to lattice disorder
modify the transfer integral at equilibrium t0 with an exponential decay with
characteristic length 1/β. The transfer integral was parametrized according to
values previously obtained for PBTTT (ref. 32). Solving for the eigenfunctions
and eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian yields the states of the system and their
energies, respectively.
Received 18 January 2013; accepted 25 June 2013; published online
4 August 2013
References
1.
Klauk, H. Organic Electronics II: More Materials and Applications (Wiley-VCH,
2012).
2.
He, Z. et al. Enhanced power-conversion efficiency in polymer solar cells using
an inverted device structure. Nature Photon. 6, 593–597 (2012).
3.
Chen, H. et al. Highly π-extended copolymers with diketopyrrolopyrrole
moieties for high-performance field-effect transistors. Adv. Mater. 24,
4618–4622 (2012).
4.
Facchetti, A. π-conjugated polymers for organic electronics and photovoltaic
cell applications. Chem. Mater. 23, 733–758 (2010).
5.
McMahon, D. P. & Troisi, A. Organic semiconductors: Impact of disorder at
different timescales. ChemPhysChem 11, 2067–2074 (2010).
6.
Chen, Z. et al. High-performance ambipolar diketopyrrolopyrrole-thieno[3,2-
b]thiophene copolymer field-effect transistors with balanced hole and electron
mobilities. Adv. Mater. 24, 647–652 (2012).
7.
Jung, J. W., Liu, F., Russell, T. P. & Jo, W. H. A high mobility conjugated
polymer based on dithienothiophene and diketopyrrolopyrrole for organic
photovoltaics. Energy Environ. Sci. 5, 6857–6861 (2012).
8.
Kronemeijer, A. J. et al. A selenophene-based low-bandgap donor–
acceptor polymer leading to fast ambipolar logic. Adv. Mater. 24,
1558–1565 (2012).
NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 12 | NOVEMBER 2013 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
1043
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

ARTICLES
NATURE MATERIALS DOI: 10.1038/NMAT3722
9.
McCulloch, I. et al. Design of semiconducting indacenodithiophene polymers
for high performance transistors and solar cells. Acc. Chem. Res. 45,
714–722 (2012).
10. Zhang, W. et al. Indacenodithiophene semiconducting polymers
for high-performance, air-stable transistors. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132,
11437–11439 (2010).
11. Tsao, H. N. et al. Ultrahigh mobility in polymer field-effect transistors by
design. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 2605–2612 (2012).
12. Mei, J., Kim, D. H., Ayzner, A. L., Toney, M. F. & Bao, Z. Siloxane-terminated
solubilizing side chains: Bringing conjugated polymer backbones closer and
boosting hole mobilities in thin-film transistors. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133,
20130–20133 (2011).
13. Yiu, A. T. et al. Side-chain tunability of furan-containing low-band-gap
polymers provides control of structural order in efficient solar cells. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 134, 2180–2185 (2012).
14. Sirringhaus, H. et al. Two-dimensional charge transport in self-organized,
high-mobility conjugated polymers. Nature 401, 685–688 (1999).
15. McMahon, D. P. et al. Relation between microstructure and charge
transport in polymers of different regioregularity. J. Phys. Chem. C 115,
19386–19393 (2011).
16. Rivnay, J. et al. Unconventional face-on texture and exceptional in-plane order
of a high mobility n-type polymer. Adv. Mater. 22, 4359–4363 (2010).
17. Watts, B., Schuettfort, T. & McNeill, C. R. Mapping of domain orientation
and molecular order in polycrystalline semiconducting polymer films with soft
x-ray microscopy. Adv. Funct. Mater. 21, 1122–1131 (2011).
18. Collins, B. A. et al. Polarized X-ray scattering reveals non-crystalline
orientational ordering in organic films. Nature Mater. 11, 536–543 (2012).
19. Grevin, B., Rannou, P., Renaud, P., Pron, A. & Travers, J-P. Scanning
tunneling microscopy investigations of self-organized poly(3-hexylthiophene)
two-dimensional polycrystals. Adv. Mater. 15, 881–884 (2003).
20. Scharsich, C. et al. Control of aggregate formation in poly(3-hexylthiophene)
by solvent, molecular weight, and synthetic method. J. Polym. Sci. B 50,
442–453 (2012).
21. Zen, A. et al. Effect of molecular weight on the structure and crystallinity of
poly(3-hexylthiophene). Macromolecules 39, 2162–2171 (2006).
22. Clark, J., Chang, J-F., Spano, F. C., Friend, R. H. & Silva, C. Determining
exciton bandwidth and film microstructure in polythiophene films using linear
absorption spectroscopy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 163306 (2009).
23. Takacs, C. J. et al. Remarkable order of a high-performance polymer. Nano Lett.
13, 2522–2527 (2013).
24. McCulloch, B. et al. Polymer chain shape of poly(3-alkylthiophenes) in solution
using small-angle neutron scattering. Macromolecules 46, 1899–1907 (2013).
25. Spakowitz, A. J. & Wang, Z-G. Exact results for a semifexible polymer chain in
an aligning field. Macromolecules 37, 5814–5823 (2004).
26. Pingel, P. et al. Temperature-resolved local and macroscopic charge carrier
transport in thin P3HT layers. Adv. Funct. Mater. 20, 2286–2295 (2010).
27. Bolsée, J-C., Oosterbaan, W. D., Lutsen, L., Vanderzande, D. & Manca, J.
The importance of bridging points for charge transport in webs of conjugated
polymer nanofibers. Adv. Funct. Mater. 23, 862–869 (2013).
28. Kondov, S. S., McGehee, W. R., Zirbel, J. J. & DeMarco, B. Three-dimensional
Anderson localization of ultracold matter. Science 334, 66–68 (2011).
29. Gomez-Navarro, C. et al. Tuning the conductance of single-walled carbon
nanotubes by ion irradiation in the Anderson localization regime. Nature
Mater. 4, 534–539 (2005).
30. Hindeleh, A. M. & Hosemann, R. Paracrystals representing the physical state
of matter. J. Phys. C 21, 4155–4170 (1988).
31. Treacy, M. M. J. & Borisenko, K. B. The local structure of amorphous silicon.
Science 335, 950–953 (2012).
32. Rivnay, J. et al. Structural origin of gap states in semicrystalline polymers and
the implications for charge transport. Phys. Rev. B 83, 121306 (2011).
33. Poelking, C. et al. Characterization of charge-carrier transport in semicrystalline
polymers: Electronic couplings, site energies, and charge-carrier dynamics
in poly(bithiophene-alt-thienothiophene) [PBTTT]. J. Phys. Chem. C 117,
1633–1640 (2013).
34. Baldo, M. A., Soos, Z. G. & Forrest, S. R. Local order in amorphous organic
molecular films. Chem. Phys. Lett. 347, 297–303 (2001).
35. Pasveer, W. F. et al. Unified description of charge-carrier mobilities in
disordered semiconducting polymers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 206601 (2005).
36. Street, R. A., Northrup, J. E. & Salleo, A. Transport in polycrystalline polymer
thin-film transistors. Phys. Rev. B 71, 165202 (2005).
37. Zhang, X. et al. In-plane liquid crystalline texture of high-performance
thienothiophene copolymer thin films. Adv. Funct. Mater. 20,
4098–4106 (2010).
38. Kline, R. J. et al. Critical role of side-chain attachment density on the order and
device performance of polythiophenes. Macromolecules 40, 7960–7965 (2007).
39. Cho, E. et al. Three-dimensional packing structure and electronic properties
of biaxially oriented poly(2,5-bis(3-alkylthiophene-2-yl)thieno-[3,2-
b]thiophene) films. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 6177–6190 (2012).
40. Brinkmann, M. & Rannou, P. Molecular weight dependence of chain
packing and semicrystalline structure in oriented films of regioregular
poly(3-hexylthiophene) revealed by high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy. Macromolecules 42, 1125–1130 (2009).
41. Reid, O. G. et al. The influence of solid-state microstructure on the origin and
yield of long-lived photogenerated charge in neat semiconducting polymers.
J. Polym. Sci. B 50, 27–37 (2012).
42. Tong, M. et al. Higher molecular weight leads to improved photoresponsivity,
charge transport and interfacial ordering in a narrow bandgap semiconducting
polymer. Adv. Funct. Mater. 20, 3959–3965 (2010).
43. Kline, R. J. et al. Dependence of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) film
morphology and field-effect mobility on molecular weight. Macromolecules 38,
3312–3319 (2005).
44. Troisi, A. The speed limit for sequential charge hopping in molecular materials.
Org. Electron. 12, 1988–1991 (2011).
45. DeLongchamp, D. M. et al. Controlling the orientation of terraced nanoscale
ribbons of a poly(thiophene) semiconductor. ACS Nano 3, 780–787 (2009).
46. Rivnay, J., Noriega, R., Kline, R. J., Salleo, A. & Toney, M. F. Quantitative
analysis of lattice disorder and crystallite size in organic semiconductor thin
films. Phys. Rev. B 84, 045203 (2011).
Acknowledgements
We thank G. Rumbles for his comments in the preparation of this manuscript. We
gratefully thank A. Facchetti and Z. Chen (Polyera, Skokie, IL), and I. McCulloch
and M. Heeney (Imperial College, London) for supplying materials (P[NDI2OD-T2],
P3HT, and PBTTT). This work is supported by the Center for Advanced Molecular
Photovoltaics Award No. KUS-C1-015-21 made by King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology (KAUST) (R.N., J.R., K.V., A.S.), and NSF (J.R., A.S.). N.S.
acknowledges support by a European Research Council (ERC) Starting Independent
Researcher Fellowship under the grant agreement No. 279587. Portions of this research
were carried out at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, a national user
facility operated by Stanford University on behalf of the US Department of Energy, Office
of Basic Energy Sciences.
Author contributions
A.S., J.R. and R.N. conceived the research. J.R., R.N., K.V. and F.P.V.K. prepared samples
for optoelectronic and structural measurements. J.R. and R.N. carried out the XRD
experiments and analysed the data. R.N. and K.V. performed the electrical and optical
measurements. R.N. performed the simulations. M.F.T., P.S. and N.S. assisted with data
interpretation. R.N., J.R. and A.S. wrote the manuscript and all authors participated in
manuscript preparation and editing.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. Reprints and
permissions information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints. Correspondence
and requests for materials should be addressed to A.S.
Competing ﬁnancial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
1044
NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 12 | NOVEMBER 2013 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

