2110406  (1 of 18)
© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
www.advmat.de
Perspective
Mixed Ionic–Electronic Conduction, a Multifunctional 
Property in Organic Conductors
Siew Ting Melissa Tan, Aristide Gumyusenge, Tyler James Quill, Garrett Swain LeCroy, 
Giorgio Ernesto Bonacchini, Ilaria Denti, and Alberto Salleo*
S. T. M. Tan, A. Gumyusenge, T. J. Quill, G. S. LeCroy, G. E. Bonacchini,  
I. Denti, A. Salleo
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
E-mail: asalleo@stanford.edu
G. E. Bonacchini
Center for Nano Science and Technology @PoliMi
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Via Giovanni Pascoli, 70/3, Milano 20133, Italy
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202110406.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202110406
consumption and sensing as well as 
high-energy-density batteries for energy 
storage. Recently, interest in developing 
systems that interface seamlessly with 
the human body (e.g., wearables, brain–
computer interfaces, and soft robots) has 
driven the development of soft, organic, 
and biomimetic materials that emulate 
the functions of their inorganic counter-
parts. Beyond emulation, these materials 
are unique because they provide an oppor-
tunity to embody such multifunctional 
properties within the material itself, rather 
than relying on device design. These mul-
tifunctional properties are intrinsic to 
organic mixed ionic electronic conductors 
(OMIECs), that is, once synthesized and 
processed, OMIECs can serve as the active 
component of multiple devices (be it tran-
sistors, sensors, energy-storage devices, 
etc.), where essentially the material is the 
device.
OMIECs generally consist of a con-
jugated backbone for electronic conduc-
tion as well as sidechains to facilitate 
ionic intercalation from the operational electrolyte and to aid 
in solvation in processing solvents.[1] Organic chemistry pro-
vides a large toolbox in the molecular design of the backbone, 
side chains, and other additives, resulting in an almost infinite 
design space for the corresponding materials properties: energy 
levels, electronic and ionic conductivity, optical, volume, and 
moduli. Additionally, one or more of these properties can be 
modified during device operation, thereby transducing an input 
(e.g., ionic) into an output (e.g., electronic), allowing OMIECs 
to be used for a variety of applications including sensors, tran-
sistors, optoelectronic devices, energy-storage electrodes, and 
actuators. The multifunctionality of OMIECs is illustrated in 
Figure 1 to highlight their versatility in design and their ability 
to respond to a variety of stimuli.
The underlying and unifying phenomena behind these prop-
erty changes arise from the large modulation in electronic and 
ionic charge density in the bulk of the OMIEC. This modula-
tion in turn results in second-order effects such as modula-
tions in electrochemical potential (electron energy levels), elec-
tronic and ionic transport, capacitance, free volume, optical 
bandgap, and modulus. Tuning these properties throughout the 
bulk of the material enables new design parameters that were 
previously untapped in traditional electronic devices where 
Organic mixed ionic–electronic conductors (OMIECs) have gained recent 
interest and rapid development due to their versatility in diverse applica-
tions ranging from sensing, actuation and computation to energy harvesting/
storage, and information transfer. Their multifunctional properties arise 
from their ability to simultaneously participate in redox reactions as well as 
modulation of ionic and electronic charge density throughout the bulk of 
the material. Most importantly, the ability to access charge states with deep 
modulation through a large extent of its density of states and physical volume 
of the material enables OMIEC-based devices to display exciting new charac-
teristics and opens up new degrees of freedom in device design. Leveraging 
the infinite possibilities of the organic synthetic toolbox, this perspective 
highlights several chemical and structural design approaches to modify 
OMIECs’ properties important in device applications such as electronic and 
ionic conductivity, color, modulus, etc. Additionally, the ability for OMIECs to 
respond to external stimuli and transduce signals to myriad types of out-
puts has accelerated their development in smart systems. This perspective 
further illustrates how various stimuli such as electrical, chemical, and optical 
inputs fundamentally change OMIECs’ properties dynamically and how these 
changes can be utilized in device applications.
1. Introduction
“Smart systems” where sensing, logic, actuation, energy har-
vesting/storage, and information transfer are performed locally 
and autonomously have great potential in impacting major 
sectors of society including the internet of things (IoT), health-
care, and energy. Within the more traditional microelectronics 
community, this need has led to the advancement of myriad 
technologies such as microchips designed for low-power 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (2 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
typically electrical or optical modulation occurs at interfaces. 
For instance, the ability to tune charge density throughout the 
bulk results in large volumetric capacitances, activating thick-
ness as a tunable parameter to optimize transconductance of 
a transistor, in addition to channel width and length. Addition-
ally, the permeability of chemical species throughout the bulk 
improves reactivity for sensors and fuel cells without the need 
for physical nanostructuring of scaffolding electrodes. Uniquely 
to OMIECs, and hence the underlying theme of the current 
discussion, this tunability can be achieved in a single mate-
rial making the design and synthesis of novel OMIECs a hot 
topic as of recent. Devices including organic electrochemical 
transistors (OECTS),[2] electrochromic displays (ECDs),[3] actua-
tors,[4] neuromorphic transistors,[5,6] bioelectronic devices,[7] 
and more,[1,8] thus exploit such modulation in OMIECs for dif-
ferent applications. With some of these technologies already 
approaching commercialization,[9] a comprehensive under-
standing of their operating mechanism is crucial to bridge the 
disconnect that exists between the fields of molecular design 
and synthesis, device physics, and device manufacturing.
This perspective highlights the various approaches to tune 
the ionic–electronic properties in OMIECs. We classify them 
either as structural—chemical modifications during materials 
design and preparation—or dynamic property changes during 
device operation. We aim to showcase the uniqueness and rich-
ness of these materials both chemically and technologically, as 
a single material can be utilized in different device architec-
tures owing to the functionality that is physically embedded in 
its bulk and afforded via mixed ionic–electronic conduction. We 
first discuss how structural tuning (such as polymer backbone 
and sidechain engineering) can be used to co-design novel 
materials for specific devices. This section aims to inspire syn-
thetic and materials chemists to revisit design principles that 
are crucial for marrying ionic and electronic conduction in a 
single material system. We then provide an overview of how 
the properties of a material are tuned during device opera-
tion (dynamic tuning) to uncover the working mechanism for 
each property change. Last, we discuss key property changes 
in OMIECs as well as resulting technologies. Throughout this 
perspective, we aim to provide an outlook on research opportu-
nities on repurposing existing materials and/or designing new 
materials and devices. We thus hope that this perspective will 
inspire collaborations between materials and device engineers 
as the multifunctional nature of OMIECs requires an equally 
multidisciplinary team of chemists, materials scientists, as well 
as electrical, chemical, and mechanical engineers to design 
next generation materials and devices to fully harness their 
potential.
2. Structural Tuning
Conjugated polymers are by far the most widely studied class of 
OMIECs and will thus be the focus of our discussion. One can 
simplistically assume that to design a high-performing OMIEC, 
tethering ionically transporting sidechains onto existing excel-
lent electron- (or hole-) transporting backbones (as represented 
in Figure 2) would suffice. However, such a task has shown to 
be more complex as ionic insertion, resulting in bulk swelling, 
and concomitant property changes are rather complex and 
warrant more careful materials considerations. Furthermore, 
sidechains affect the self-assembly of the material, which in 
turn determines its properties. To uncover the structural tun-
ability of polymer mixed ionic–electronic conductors (MIECs), 
we will discuss backbone and sidechains engineering as sepa-
rate design strategies, but readers are reminded that in prac-
tice, both from a synthetic and an engineering point of view, 
these two cannot be decoupled especially at the microstructural 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
Figure 1.  Multifunctional property tuning in OMIEC materials. The schematic illustrates how various device relevant properties can be dynamically 
tuned or intentionally designed into the structure of the material as well as the mechanism by which the specific property is modulated. For example, 
adjusting the electric potential of a device can dynamically alter the conductivity of an OMIEC by changing the charge carrier density in the material 
(top left). On the other hand, substitution of different backbone moieties into the structure of the material will also alter the conductivity by changing 
the carrier mobility in the OMIEC (top right). Similar relationships are shown for different dynamic and chemical (static) tuning methods and various 
properties. The mechanisms by which properties are modulated are shown at the bottom of the schematic.
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (3 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
level. We focus on homo- and copolymeric OMIECs as the dis-
cussion on heterogenous blends. Other notable classes include 
blends and copolymers of electronic and ionic conductors (e.g., 
PEDOT:PSS).[1]
2.1. Backbone Engineering
Backbone engineering in polymer MIECs has benefited from 
recent advances in polymer chemistry, wherein, for the past 
four decades, major milestones have been reached in terms 
of extending conjugation lengths, tuning charge carrier delo-
calization as well as substituting heteroatoms along polymer 
backbones. To uncover the design principles of OMIECs, let 
us begin with a simplistic chemical structure of an all-acceptor 
polymer such as a poly(alkoxythiophene) (PAT).[10] The conju-
gated core consists of a thiophene ring, on which alkoxy groups 
are anchored. The sulfur atom (heteroatom) allows tuning of 
the electron density within the core. More (or less) electron-
withdrawing atoms (O: furan, N: pyrrole, Se: selenophene) can 
be used to tune electron densities, molecular planarity, and 
π–π interactions. Though most of the reported polymer MIEC 
structures are thiophene-based, heteroatom substitution is still 
a viable route toward designing new OMIECs. For instance, 
the backbone planarity afforded by increasing the radius of the 
heteroatom has yet to be fully investigated in combination with 
efficient ionic conduction. The energy distribution across the 
ring allows different reactivities, which are commonly exploited 
for polymerization and for aromatic substitutions at different 
positions on the conjugated ring. Such reactivity can be utilized 
for the synthesis of fused-ring systems,[10] an area that has yet 
to mature in OMIECs. Molecular fine-tuning of the core unit 
and the substituting groups constitutes a large field of study in 
polymer chemistry beyond this discussion.
A commonly studied example of PATs is poly(3,4-ethylenedi-
oxythiophene) (PEDOT) where the building block is slightly elec-
tron deficient due to the presence of oxygen atoms. More impor-
tantly, the bridged substitution obviates the regio-irregularity 
possibility (along with minimized twisting along the backbone), 
making PEDOT and its derivatives one of most studied classes 
of redox-active organic materials. Though the homopolymerized 
and hole-transporting (or p-type) EDOT derivatives remain more 
studied, the tunability presented by its simple yet rich structure 
opens avenues for the design and synthesis of more complex 
backbones. For instance, the copolymerization of the function-
alized dioxythiophene unit with efficient charge-transporting 
building blocks was recently shown to be an effective route 
toward donor–acceptor polymers with excellent performance in 
OECT devices.[11] Further tuning of electron affinity along the 
conjugated core has also yielded electron-transporting polymer 
MIECs (n-type polymers).[9,12–15] The most widely studied group 
of n-type OMIECs consists of a naphthalenediimide (NDI) core, 
which is often copolymerized with a more electron-donating 
building block (e.g., unsubstituted thiophene). In such an 
electron-depleted π-conjugated core, electrons have shown to 
be effectively injected and delocalized along the polymer chain 
especially when ionically conductive sidechains are utilized.[12,16] 
The complementarity afforded by utilizing electron-transporting 
poly­mers and hole-transporting counterparts has recently 
become of great interest in OMIECs especially for polymer-based 
energy storage.[13] Though n-type OMIECs remain underex-
plored in comparison to their p-type counterparts, recent efforts 
have demonstrated that outstanding device performances can 
be realized especially via backbone fine-tuning. However, fur-
ther efforts are still warranted on this front specially to address: 
i) poor backbone planarity (commonly introduced by the bulky 
NDI unit), ii) environmental instability found in most n-type 
polymers, not to mention iii) boosting their electronic mobilities 
which still lag behind those demonstrated in p-type counterparts. 
The balance of electron density along the core thus remains a 
key approach for controlled modulation of energy levels, the col-
oration of the chromophores, as well as the molecular packing 
for tunable ionic intercalation, some of the key tunable proper-
ties in OMIECs which are discussed in later sections.
2.2. Sidechain Engineering
In polymer MIECs, sidechains play a key part in the unique 
nature of these materials, that is, not only do they serve as 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
Figure 2.  Schematic representation of two major structural considerations for designing a polymeric MIEC. For the sake of a simplified discussion, 
ionic transport is attributed to sidechains and electronic transport to the conjugated backbone. In practice, sidechains serve as ion shuttles/hosts into 
the film and concomitant charge generation and delocalization occur along and between conjugated backbones. Also shown is the energy diagram in 
conjugated polymers showing the tunability of the energy bandgap via fine structural tuning of donor (D) and acceptor (A) units.
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (4 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
solvating media for the electrolyte, but also as: i) molecular 
shuttles for ionic species in and out of the bulk, and ii) key 
components in the crystallization and packing of polymer 
chains. As previously introduced, polar sidechains are com-
monly utilized in OMIECs mostly to enable ionic intercala-
tion (Figure 2). In some cases, sidechains have also been used 
to directly dope the polymer backbone.[12,16] It is thus evident 
that their design/selection is a key aspect in electrochemical 
devices. Since sidechain engineering will impact several of the 
properties that are impacted by backbone engineering, in the 
later sections we will only discuss those properties that seem 
less intuitive and those that are unique to sidechain modifica-
tion. Recently, emerging mixed-ionic conducting polymers have 
been designed without sidechains such as the ladder polymer  
poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline). While this class of 
materials is out of the scope of this perspective, readers are 
directed to reviews by Torricelli et al.[8] and Che et al.[17]
2.3. Chemical Doping
When other synthetic approaches (e.g., backbone and side-chain 
engineering) are undesirable, chemical doping of OMIECs can 
be an effective method for altering the “native” state of the 
material.[18] Common chemical dopants are small molecules 
that are either highly electron-rich or electron-withdrawing to 
facilitate electron-transfer reactions between the OMIEC and 
dopant. For instance, electron-rich dopants with amine moi-
eties such as 4-(2,3-dihydro-1,3-dimethyl-1H-benzimidazol-
2-yl)-N,N-dimethylbenzenamine[19] 
and 
triaminomethane 
derivatives[20] are highly effective electron donors to electron-
conducting n-type OMIECs. Electron-deficient dopants such as 
2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) 
extract electrons from shallow highest occupied molecular 
orbital (HOMO) p-type OMIECs, increasing hole concentration. 
The resulting increase in charge density improves conductivity 
for a variety of devices such as transistors and thermoelectric 
devices (see Section  4.2.1). Additionally, the change in Fermi 
level and electrochemical potential of electrons can alter the 
OMIEC’s subsequent reactivity to other redox-active species 
in the environment (see Section  3.2) as well as their optical 
properties. This ability to alter the initial state of material pro-
vides even more space to tune the properties of OMIECs for 
a particular application, as the initial state (i.e., the position of 
the Fermi level in the density-of-states) of an OMIEC can be 
shifted such that the range of conditions over which an OMIEC 
exhibits dynamic response in conductivity, color, and energy 
levels can be tuned for an arbitrary range of stimuli.
2.4. Processing & Additives
OMIEC micro- and nanostructure (morphology) impacts all 
aspects of material performance, including charge-carrier 
mobility, kinetics of device operation, and mechanical/chemical 
stability.[21] Broadly, the necessity of coupled ionic and charge-
carrier motion in OMIECs is thought to require materials that 
have largely disordered, amorphous regions that facilitate rapid 
ion transport while simultaneously having well-connected, 
ordered domains that facilitate charge-carrier transport. These 
conflicting requirements have made it so that the optimal mor-
phology for OMIECs is still an active area of research. Design 
strategies highlight the vast number of tunable controls that 
exist in both material synthesis and processing.[22,23]
Control of the morphology and nanoscale interactions of 
OMIECs not only dictates electronic properties, but also dictates 
mechanical properties. In polymeric MIECs, mechanical prop-
erties such as modulus, breaking strength, and elastic limit are 
intimately linked to the size, distribution, and amount of crys-
talline aggregates in the material. For example, controlling these 
aggregates has led to the development of seemingly “rigid” (i.e., 
high-modulus) polymer semiconductors that display remark-
able flexibility and maintain electronic transport properties by 
inducing nanoconfinement of the polymer and reducing aggre-
gate size.[24] These developments have long-reaching applica-
tions in biosensing, flexible thermoelectrics, and even artifi-
cial skin.[25] This further shows that understanding material 
microstructure is not only of fundamental interest, but is also 
of immense practical importance, as microstructure impacts 
properties seemingly as disparate as electronic and mechanical 
properties. Such complexity in the microstructure of OMIECs 
thus complicates the fundamental understanding of device 
operation. During OMIEC operation in electrochemical tran-
sistors for example, significant volume expansion occurs con-
comitant with disruption to the ordered regions due to pen-
etration of ions into the bulk during the volumetric charging 
process.[26] Furthermore, the exact nature of interaction between 
penetrating ions and the OMIEC is poorly understood. Recent 
studies have suggested that glycolated sidechains in polymer 
OMIECs can chelate around ionic species, leading to signifi-
cant film morphology disruption.[27] Ultimately, design rules 
governing the optimal morphology for OMIECs remain fertile 
ground for investigation. It is expected that the future deploy-
ment of operando and in situ characterization techniques will 
facilitate the development of such design rules.[28] In particular, 
techniques such as X-ray scattering combined with electro-
chemical measurements could elucidate the complex dynamics 
which arise during charging, many of which are still relatively 
unknown. Additionally, spectroscopic techniques including vis-
ible and infrared absorption spectroscopy and Raman spectros-
copy provide insights into both ordered and disordered domains 
of these materials, although detailed modeling is often required 
to link these changes back to the OMIEC structure.
3. Dynamic Tuning
Dynamic changes in the properties of OMIECs enable them 
to respond to and transduce external stimuli into a variety of 
output signals. Changes in electronic and ionic charge density 
are the unifying phenomena behind modulations in its electro-
chemical potential, conductivity, color, modulus, and volume 
as illustrated in Figure 3. Modulation in charge density can 
be induced by a variety of external stimuli such as electrical 
impulses, exposure to chemical species, or under the influ-
ence of optical illumination. The increase in electronic charge 
density on the conjugated backbone results in changes in elec-
trochemical potential (Fermi level), conductivity, and optical 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (5 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
bandgap. During operation, the OMIEC is typically immersed 
in a medium containing solvated ions (solid or liquid electro-
lyte). As the electronic charge density changes on the OMIEC’s 
backbone, counterions are transported between the OMIECs’ 
matrix and the electrolyte to ensure electroneutrality. This fur-
ther influences the ionic conductivity, modulus, and volume 
of the OMIEC. With the myriad sources of stimuli—electrical, 
chemical, and optical—that modulate the charge density of 
OMIECs, which subsequently result in a variety of changes in 
materials properties, OMIECs can be utilized for a variety of 
devices that comprise intelligent autonomous systems—sen-
sors, energy harvesting/storage, logic, memory, actuation, and 
communication.
3.1. Electrical Stimuli
OMIECs can be deposited on the surface of electrically conduc-
tive planar substrates (such as in sensors, thermoelectrics,[29] 
electrochromics,[30] and electrochemical actuators[31]) or as 
a conductor between two electrodes (e.g., channel material 
of transistors[2]). Sources of electrical inputs can range from 
external electronic circuits (such as the operation of thermo-
electrics, ion pumps,[32] transistors, electrochromics, and actua-
tors) or from biological sources (such as single cells, tissues, 
organs, and other physiological or aqueous environments). By 
applying an electric field or potential on the OMIEC, electrons 
or holes can be injected capacitively into the lowest unoccupied 
molecular orbital (LUMO) or HOMO (n-type or p-type, respec-
tively), thereby increasing the OMIEC’s charge density. Though 
electrically stimulating OMIECs on different surfaces has been 
widely shown, chemical and mechanical mismatch between the 
softer (and often hydrated) OMIECs and common electrodes 
remain major challenges. Engineering the Young’s modulus 
of the materials, mitigating the corrosion and oxidation at 
the metallic interfaces are crucial to ensuring better electrical 
performances. This is thus a potential area of study for future 
applications, especially for long-term implantation and biointer-
facing. Bimetallic material or metallic alloys, carbon nanotubes, 
graphite, and highly reactive biodegradable metallic fillers,[33–35] 
among other strategies are potential electrode candidates.
3.2. Chemical Stimuli
Another common approach to tune the charge density of 
OMIECs is via their interaction with chemical species in the 
environment. OMIECs can interact with chemicals in a variety 
of processes such as faradaic charge transfer from redox-active 
molecules and capacitive interactions with ions. Instead of 
applying an electric potential, charges can be accumulated in 
the OMIEC via faradaic reactions from redox-active molecules 
in the OMIECs’ environment. Depending on the relative electro-
chemical potential of electrons on the OMIEC and the chemical 
species, oxidizing or reducing agents can be utilized to extract 
or inject electrons into the OMIEC. As noted above, applying a 
potential on an OMIEC dynamically tunes the electrochemical 
potential of electrons, thereby controlling the relative reactivity 
of the OMIEC to the reactant. Judicious design of sidechains 
on the OMIEC enables favorable interactions with molecules in 
its environment. For instance, the recent development of polar 
sidechains using glycol moieties enables the intercalation of 
hydrophilic or polar species throughout the bulk of the OMIEC 
electrode, allowing for volumetric reaction and charging.
Achieving effective charge transfer between the analyte and 
OMIEC requires appropriate alignment of the electrochemical 
potential of electrons on the OMIEC electrode and the redox 
species. Failure to do so may result in the subsequent transfer of 
charges to other redox-active sinks in the environment, leading 
to undesirable side reactions and products that may interfere 
with the OMIEC’s operation. Electrons flow from a region of 
higher to lower electrochemical potential. Hence, achieving 
electron transfer from redox-active species to the OMIEC 
requires the latter to have a deep LUMO (high electron affinity). 
Alternatively, chemically p-doping the OMIEC to first deplete 
the HOMO could subsequently allow the filling of the HOMO 
by the redox-active species (see above for structural tuning). On 
the other hand, electrons can be transferred from the HOMO 
to the redox active analyte, thereby oxidizing the electrode. It 
is challenging to utilize electron-conducting polymers with low-
lying LUMOs for direct electron transfer as the high electron 
energy in the LUMO may result in the subsequent loss of elec-
trons to ambient oxidative species such as molecular oxygen.[36] 
Due to their ability to volumetrically solvate ions from the oper-
ational electrolyte, OMIECs are also ideal materials to detect the 
concentration of ions in aqueous analytes. The OMIEC’s poten-
tial varies logarithmically with the concentration of ions in 
solution according to the Nernst equation. This potential can be 
measured directly against a reference electrode or second-order  
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
Figure 3.  Dynamic tuning of OMIECs. The unifying phenomena under-
lying changes in OMIECs’ properties are charge density. Accumulation 
of electronic charges on the OMIEC’s backbone increases electronic car-
rier density which results in changes to electrochemical potential (elec-
tron energy levels), electronic conductivity, and color. The simultaneous 
increase in compensating ion concentration reduces elastic modulus and 
increases volume.
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (6 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
effects resulting from this change in potential can be recorded 
(such as electronic conductivity in OECTs). Therefore, OMIECs 
are commonly used as electrodes for ionic sensors to detect 
Na+, K +, Mg 2+, Ca2+, NH3+, and other ions commonly pre-
sent in physiological solutions.[37,38] To ensure specificity, the 
OMIEC can be functionalized with synthetic[38] or biological 
membranes[39] that selectively allow some ions to permeate. 
Furthermore, OMIECs can also be functionalized with ligands 
that bind to non-redox active and neutral molecules where the 
binding of these analytes could increase the impedance, optical 
properties, or pH of the electrode.[40] The ability to function in 
aqueous electrolytes and detect a variety of chemical inputs 
makes OMIECs ideal material candidates in long-term health[41] 
and environmental-monitoring devices.[42]
The accumulation of holes by the oxidation of p-type 
OMIECs or the accumulation of electrons by the reduction of 
n-type OMIECs after exposure to redox-active species can result 
in changes in electronic conductivity, such as in the channel of 
an OECT.[43] When a chemically sensitive OMIEC gate is used, 
the change in potentials on the gate are coupled capacitively to 
the channel’s potential. Hence, chemical changes occurring on 
the gate during sensing directly influence channel conductivity. 
For instance, the presence of lactate secreted by cells grown on 
an OMIEC gate resulted in amplified current signals across the 
channel.[44] Caution should be taken when conducting these 
faradaic reactions in the presence of applied electric fields in 
electrochemical devices as they may affect the reaction rates 
in unexpected ways and accelerate parasitic side reactions and 
chemical degradation of the OMIEC.[45] An alternative approach 
would be to separate the processes of chemical detection and 
conductivity modulation.[46]
On the other hand, during the sensing of ion concentration, 
the intercalation of ions from the electrolyte increases the ionic 
conductivity and volumetric capacitance of the OMIEC. This 
reduces the OMIEC’s impedance, which can be measured by 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Simultaneously, the 
change in potential of the OMIEC from ions in solution influ-
ences the electronic charge density and hence conductivity of 
the OMIEC. Therefore, electrolyte-gated transistors[8] are a 
common architecture used to transduce these ionic concen-
tration changes into drain-current modulations. Since these 
ions are not redox-active within the potentials typically applied 
in OMIEC-based devices (sub 1 V), these capacitive (or poten-
tiometric) devices do not encounter issues faced by the fara-
daic chemical sensors. Faradaic charging of the OMIEC in an 
aqueous electrolyte results in simultaneous uptake of ions from 
the electrolyte and swelling of the OMIEC material. Hence, 
electrochemical actuators can be powered by OMIECs func-
tionalized with enzymes to catalyze the reaction of metabolites 
such as glucose, enabling self-powered artificial muscles.[47] 
Harvesting energy from the environment to power soft actua-
tors opens potential applications in smart stimuli-responsive 
soft robots and microfluidic valves.
3.3. Optical Illumination
The conversion of optical stimuli into electrical signals has been 
largely exploited for numerous applications, from biomedical 
sensing to optical communication, imaging, night vision, 
thermal efficiency analysis, and flexible optoelectronics.[48–51] 
Compared to the above forms of stimulation (i.e., electrical and 
chemical), utilizing optical illumination to dynamically tune the 
properties of OMIECs in devices is yet to be explored. This opens 
opportunities for investigating OMIEC-based analogs of typical 
device configurations such as solar cells, phototransistors,[52] and 
photodiodes for biocompatible and low-voltage operation.
Moreover, besides these conventional electronic platforms, 
light-sensitive OMIECs could potentially play a role in the 
development of optoelectronic interfaces for neurostimulation. 
Indeed, traditional hydrophobic organic electronic materials 
have recently emerged as opto-bio actuators in both in vitro and 
in vivo applications, where photoexcitation effectively modu-
lates the biological activity of cells and tissues.[53–56] While the 
physical and physiological mechanisms of stimulation in these 
systems are often not fully elucidated,[57,58] the phototransduc-
tion mechanism is generally associated with thermal effects, 
charge-transfer reactions (Faradaic coupling), photochemical 
phenomena, and capacitive coupling at the biotic/abiotic inter-
faces.[59,60] In fact, a common strategy to increase photostimula-
tion relies on materials configurations that maximize the effec-
tive electrochemical surface, such as nanostructured planar 
interfaces,[61,62] nanoparticles,[63] or hierarchical nanocrystals.[64] 
This seems to suggest that although little is known on whether 
OMIECs can play a role to further advance this emerging field, 
their ability to establish strong capacitive couplings through 
volumetric charging—along with their synthetic tunability 
and biocompatibility, which mirrors that of traditional organic 
semiconductors—should be taken into consideration for future 
developments of optoelectronic biointerfaces.
In 
a 
similar 
way, 
the 
emergence 
of 
organic 
photoelectrodes[65,66]in photocatalytic and photoelectrochem-
ical applications can inform design strategies for OMIECs. 
While these devices have conventionally utilized traditional 
organic semiconductors that are hydrophobic, analogies can 
be drawn to design OMIECs with photoactive properties. This 
represents yet another opportunity for OMIECs, where their 
intrinsic redox-activity could be further enhanced by means of 
photocatalysis.
4. OMIEC Property Changes
Having provided an intuition on how different structural modi-
fications and dynamic stimuli can be utilized to modulate the 
properties of OMIECs, we shift our focus on understanding 
the physical and chemical meaning of key property changes 
and on discussing various device technologies enabled by such 
changes. We discuss both chemical (static) and stimuli-respon-
sive (dynamic) techniques for modulating energy levels, con-
ductivity, coloration, and volume to demonstrate the utility of 
OMIECs. For each property, we will cover mechanistic implica-
tions which should be considered when employing such tuning 
methods, and touch on the crossover between methods where 
relevant. We will also discuss device demonstrations enabled by 
each property change and highlight future research opportuni-
ties with a special emphasis on modulating different properties 
in a single material system.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (7 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
4.1. Energy Levels
4.1.1. Chemical Tuning of Energy Levels
The location of the HOMO and LUMO (or valence and conduc-
tion band) of an OMIEC is heavily influenced by the chemical 
structure of the polymer backbone. More thorough summaries 
of the synthetic approaches for tuning the energy levels of semi-
conducting polymers are available elsewhere,[67] but useful intu-
ition regarding tuning of the HOMO and LUMO levels can be 
garnered by a simplistic particle-in-a-box analogy. The introduc-
tion of electron-donating (or withdrawing groups) will increase 
(or decrease) the HOMO and/or LUMO levels of the material 
as shown in Figure  2. In this respect, the sidechains grafted 
onto the polymer backbone will in fact affect the energy levels 
in the material, as the substitution of alkyl versus glycol side-
chains can introduce different resonance and inductive effects. 
However, for efficient ionic transport, glycol sidechains (or a 
blend of alkyl and glycol chains) are desired,[23,68] meaning that 
most practical methods for energetic tuning include employing 
different backbone moieties and heteroatom substitutions. Fur-
ther energetic control can be achieved by adjusting the conjuga-
tion length of the polymer and limiting the number of repeat 
units over which the charge can delocalize—shorter conjuga-
tion lengths will widen the bandgap. Conjugation length can be 
limited via the insertion of conjugation breaks (e.g., thieno[2,3-
b]thiophene) into the backbone of the polymer[69] or from intra-
ring torsion due to steric effects[70] and extended by promoting 
backbone planarity through the introduction of bridging units 
or by non-covalent interactions between adjacent rings which 
promote coplanarity.[71–73]
Functionally, there are many situations where it is desirable 
to synthetically tune the energy levels of an OMIEC, but they 
largely revolve around adjusting the stability of charges, which 
are injected onto the polymer backbone. In the field of organic 
bioelectronics, p-type materials with an ionization potential 
below 4.9 eV or n-types with an IP > 4 eV afford OMIECs stable 
operation in water and other biocompatible environments by 
avoiding parasitic side reactions.[12,36] The offset between the 
HOMO of the cathode, and the LUMO of the anode also dictates 
the operating potential of OMIEC-based polymer batteries.[13,74] 
Analogous to electrochemical stability, the HOMO/LUMO 
levels of OMIECs can also be tuned to optimize these materials 
for catalysis or faradaic chemical reactions, where band height 
and alignment is needed for reactions to proceed.[36]
Chemical dopants can also be used to control the initial 
energy levels of electrons in these material systems when 
other synthetic approaches may be undesirable. The relative 
electrochemical potential (energy level) of electrons on the 
OMIEC with that of redox-active species in the environment 
can result in charge-transfer reactions between the OMIEC 
and the chemical species. These reactions may be desirable, 
such as those used during chemical sensing (faradaic) of a 
target analyte, or undesirable, such as the oxygen reduction 
reaction (ORR) with ambient molecular oxygen. For instance, 
to increase the stability of electrons to minimize ORR side 
reactions, p-type dopants such as the high-electron-affinity 
F4TCNQ that extract electrons from the HOMO of p-type 
OMIECs can be added.
Morphology also plays a crucial part in setting the energy 
levels of OMIECs. Extensive work on conjugated polymers 
has shown that the optical bandgap can be tuned by inducing 
structural order/disorder in solid-state films via control of pro-
cessing solvent, material molecular weight, and even device 
temperature. This is largely due to the sensitivity of the 
HOMO and LUMO energy levels to the effective conjugation 
length in conjugated polymer OMIECs. Furthermore, this 
sensitivity of the HOMO/LUMO levels to material microstruc-
ture holds for a wide variety of polymeric materials, including 
the prototypical polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and 
more recent material developments in donor–acceptor copoly-
mers.[75] The ability to correlate HOMO/LUMO levels with 
microstructure provides a sensitive probe to understanding 
structure, and the ability to control structure provides a pow-
erful tool to tune material performance, with applications 
ranging from ECDs/windows to novel sensors and thermo-
electric devices.[76,77]
4.1.2. Tuning Energy Levels Dynamically
Besides the chemical approach of intrinsically changing the 
location of an OMIEC’s energy levels, these can also be tuned 
during device operation. This is exemplarily manifested when 
OMIECs are utilized as energy-storage electrodes. During 
charging, an external voltage is applied across the two elec-
trodes, thereby injecting electrons in the LUMO of the n-type 
conductor and holes into the p-type conductor. This increases 
the electrochemical potential of electrons on the anode and 
decreases that on the cathode, thus storing charges as poten-
tial energy that can be released upon connection with a load. 
Counterions from the operational electrolyte simultaneously 
intercalate into the electrodes for electrostatic compensa-
tion. As OMIECs are simultaneously redox-active and iono-
electronically conductive, neither additives nor binders are 
required unlike in conventional energy-storage technologies 
(e.g., lithium-ion batteries). Furthermore, they can be oper-
ated in safe aqueous electrolytes, enabling applications in 
biological environments including implants, wearables, and 
lab-on-chip devices making harvesting of chemical energy 
from the environment realistic. The OMIECs’ sidechains fur-
ther enable solvation in processing solvents, allowing the 
extraction of the active materials from current collecting 
electrodes at the device’s end of life followed by redeposition 
onto fresh electrodes for a new lease of life. These properties 
enable ease of recycling of OMIEC electrodes for the circular 
economy of organic electronic technologies.[74] Additionally, 
the energy levels can be modulated during the faradaic (charge 
transfer) reactions we discussed above between OMIECs and 
redox-active analytes. Such reactivity has recently enabled self-
powered implants and wearable devices that obtain energy 
from biological fluids,[78] an emerging field and a platform for 
future studies on how electronics interface with living organ-
isms. Besides the electrochemical approaches, illuminating the 
OMIEC with pulses of light is also another route for exciting 
electrons to higher energy levels to be subsequently transferred 
to the desired oxidant such as in photoelectrochemical cells 
used for sensing or water splitting.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (8 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
4.2. Conductivity
4.2.1. Chemical Tuning of Conductivity
Strategies to increase the electronic conductivity of semi-
conducting polymers predominantly rely on increasing the 
charge carrier mobility of holes or electrons for p- and n-type 
materials, respectively. High charge-carrier mobility is largely 
enabled by charge delocalization along the polymer backbone 
(intrachain transport) aided by chain-to-chain hopping (inter-
chain hopping) when charge carriers meet chain ends or other 
morphological traps (e.g., sharp kinks). Efficient charge delo-
calization is commonly associated with backbone coplanarity, 
conjugation length, narrow bandgaps, and high degree of 
order between chains. Though such strategies are commonly 
effective in other electronic devices such as organic field-effect 
transistors (OFETs), their relationship with device performance 
remains an emerging field of study in electrochemical devices. 
Here, the polymer backbone must accommodate incoming ions 
and their transport must be optimized concomitantly with elec-
tronic transport.
In OECT devices where electronic conductivity often serves 
as an important figure of merit, a few of the aforementioned 
backbone engineering strategies have shown to translate to 
improved device performance. For instance, the effect of back-
bone conformation on device performance was probed by 
comparing a triethylene glycol (TEG)-bearing benzo[1,2-b:4,5-
b′]dithiophene (BDT) homopolymer to its thiophene (T) and 
2,2′-bithiophene (2T) copolymers.[79] BDT was selected to 
afford a rather linear homopolymer while the copolymerization 
tunes the backbone curvature. This strategy showed to result 
in: i) tunable backbone orientation relative to the substrate, 
ii) controllable ionization potentials, and iii) increased polymer 
crystallinity, which ultimately translated to improved con-
ductivity. In fact, a 100-fold increase in transconductance was 
observed when the homopolymer was compared to the copo­
lymer derivatives in respective OECT devices. Record-high per-
formance could further be realized when electron-rich building 
blocks were utilized to tune the sidechain distribution as well 
as the film swelling. Other parameters include efficient polaron 
delocalization along the polymer chain,[80] as well as operation 
stability.[79] When designing novel OMIECs, the relationship 
between the proposed structure and the resulting solid-state 
behavior must be probed for combined electronic and ionic 
transport. Demonstrating high carrier mobility (electronic 
conductivity) alone becomes insufficient, especially if no new 
insights are gained on how the ionic uptake into the polymer 
bulk impacts the generation and delocalization of electronic 
charges. Ideally, one should target the generation of many yet 
highly mobile carriers in the bulk to achieve excellent modula-
tion of an OMIEC.
One of the unique hallmarks of OMIECs is volumetric 
doping of the material, enabled by the large free volume of 
polymers and ionically conductive sidechains, which facilitate 
counterion motion throughout the bulk of the material.[1] It 
is this ability to modulate the bulk conductivity that separates 
OECTs from more conventional thin-film transistors and gives 
rise to the large values of normalized transconductance, which 
make these OMIEC materials attractive for many applications. 
In this regard, the sidechains of the material do not contribute 
to electronic conduction but are wholly responsible for the ionic 
conduction and the volumetric doping of the material. The 
most commonly employed strategy for engineering ionic con-
ductivity into OMIECs is replacing the alkyl sidechains from 
conventional organic semiconductors (OSCs) with polar oligo-
ethylene glycol sidechains.[23] The choice of sidechains in poly-
meric OMIECs has been shown to dramatically impact material 
morphology and OMIEC performance. Specifically, the ubiqui-
tous choice of glycolated sidechains generally leads to materials 
with more disordered microstructures, improved ionic trans-
port, and decreased electronic charge-carrier transport com-
pared to analogous alkylated versions of the same materials.[23] 
Furthermore, the design of glycolated sidechains can be tai-
lored with different lengths, branching points, and densities to 
simultaneously change ion and charge-carrier transport prop-
erties.[23] More recently, it has been demonstrated that blends 
of alkyl and glycol sidechains can be desirable for OMIECs, as 
these sidechain blends can counterbalance electronic mobility, 
device stability, self-assembly, and volumetric doping.[13,16,81] 
As previously mentioned, the sidechains play a crucial role in 
microstructure formation in OMIECs, and consequently, even 
minute adjustments to sidechain length, polarity, or density can 
lead to pronounced differences in resulting properties.
Although less studied than in traditional organic semi-
conductors, chemical doping of OMIECs can be employed to 
enable highly tailored materials properties. Just as in more 
conventional OSCs, doping of OMIECs typically involves redox 
reactions between dopant molecules and the material, resulting 
in a shift of the Fermi level. Such reactions will modulate the 
carrier concentration in the material, resulting in a change in 
conductivity. This allows one further control over the “native” 
state of the material, where conductivity can be either enhanced 
or diminished, depending on the specifics of the system. Such 
strategies can be very useful in practical applications such as 
biosensors, where aligning the peak transconductance of the 
material to the electrochemical potential range of interest can 
lead to improved response and sensitivity. Similarly, in many 
electronics and bioelectronics applications, molecular dopants 
have been used to shift the threshold voltage of devices, thereby 
increasing the resistance of the material in its native state to 
enable low power operation. An excellent example of changing 
material conductivity was shown by the chemical de-doping of 
PEDOT:PSS in which the operating mode of electrochemical 
transistor devices was altered from depletion mode, where the 
material is initially doped prior to stimulus, to enhancement 
mode, where the material is initially de-doped.[18] Additionally, 
increasing charge-carrier density and mobility is important for 
increasing power factor and electronic conductivity in thermoe-
lectric devices as shown in Figure 4. Recently, the incorporation 
of polar glycol sidechains in OMIECs improved the solubility 
of dopants in the OMIECs (for example F4TCNQ for p-type 
polymers), lowering required dopant concentrations, thus mini-
mizing the disruption of the OMIEC’s microstructure.[82]
Though the relation between conductivity (both ionic and 
electronic) and OMIEC morphology is a complex and still-
evolving area of research, semiconducting polymers have shown 
to perform efficiently thanks to the presence of tie-chains, that 
is, less ordered regions can be bridged by long chains to enable 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (9 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
efficient charge transport.[83,84] This behavior becomes a prom-
ising venue for electron transport to be married with ionic 
transport as the latter is favored in less ordered systems. Micro-
structure engineering thus becomes important to realize mor-
phologies that simultaneously favor ionic uptake and efficient 
electron delocalization. The morphology of OMIECs is heavily 
influenced through processing by choices of solvents, cosol-
vents, material blend ratios, and processing post-treatments. 
Extensive work on P3HT showed that the quality, size, and 
number of ordered domains, and thus the resulting charge-
carrier mobility, could all be controlled by careful selection of 
the solvent/cosolvent.[85,86] A similar idea has been applied to 
the prototypical OMIEC, PEDOT:PSS, where choice of cosolvent 
and/or solvent additives for the aqueous PEDOT:PSS has been 
extensively studied.[87,88] Aqueous PEDOT:PSS is commonly 
mixed with a low volume fraction of ethylene glycol, as this is 
thought to produce more well-connected ordered domains that 
improve charge mobility while not disrupting ionic transport 
significantly. Crosslinking agents and acid post-treatments to 
PEDOT:PSS have also been explored as methods to tailor film 
morphology and transport properties.[89,90] Ultimately, materials 
chemical design (i.e., backbone and side-chain design) must be 
studied alongside appropriate materials processing design, as 
the resulting performance of OMIECs is closely linked to the 
final material microstructure.
4.2.2. Dynamically Tuned Conductivity
The ability to dynamically tune the charge density throughout the 
bulk of OMIECs results in large changes in their conductivity, 
which has been exemplified by OECTs.[91,2] The electrical polari-
zation of an OMIEC in presence of mobile ionic charges results 
in significant modulations of the hole (or electron) carrier density  
within the material. The unique mixed transport properties of 
this class of polymers give rise to capacitive charging effects that 
involve the entirety of the materials’ bulk, effectively establishing 
volumetric capacitances ranging from few tens to hundreds of 
F cm–3.[92,93] These remarkable capacitance values exceed those 
displayed by electrical double-layers, as well as those achievable 
with state-of-the-art high-permittivity dielectrics.[91] As a result, 
charge-carrier density variations of many orders of magnitude are 
obtained with sub-volt polarizations (exceeding 1020 cm–3),[94–96]  
enabling low-powered switching devices.
In efforts to unravel the complex relationship between mate-
rials characteristics and device physics, and to fully under-
stand the interplay between electronic and ionic transport in 
OMIECs, OECTs serve as a starting point owing to the well-
studied Bernard–Malliaras mode that describes OECT opera-
tion. While the semi-quantitative nature of this classic model is 
still of relevance, its ability to perform quantitative predictions 
is typically restricted to low polarization voltages and low oper-
ating frequencies. Recently, this model has become the founda-
tion for more detailed descriptions of device operation, which 
build upon a more accurate understanding of charge-transport 
mechanisms and how they are affected by the microstructural 
features of the OMIECs. For example, in OMIECs—as in most 
organic semiconductors—the lack of long-range order limits 
the electronic charge carriers to nanometric domains such as 
crystallites and/or along the backbone of the polymer chains 
and thermally activated hopping is needed for inter-chain and 
inter-domain transport.[1] The quantum mechanical description 
of these tunneling events indicates a strong dependence of the 
hopping rate on the distance and the relative energy between 
hopping locations, this rate being generally worse in systems 
characterized by less dense sites—both in terms of space and 
energy distributions. Given the stochastic assortment of hop-
ping energies and distances, whose statistical distribution is 
enclosed in the density of states (DOS) of the semiconductor, 
not all charges exhibit the same mobility.[97,98] In OMIEC-based 
devices such as OECTs, where the charge-carrier concentration 
gradually increases with increasing polarization, holes (or elec-
trons) tend to first populate low energy sites that are sparser, 
where the hopping rate is lower, to then access more densely 
packed states at higher energies, characterized by higher mobil-
ities.[97,98] As the DOS is incrementally filled beyond the region 
of optimal transport, the available states tend to become sparse 
again, thus determining an inflection in the increase of the con-
ductivity. Indeed, compared to conventional FETs, the charge 
density reached in OECTs is much larger and therefore more 
band filling may be noticeable. Friedlein et al. argue that, for this 
reason, the polarization-controlled change in conductivity of the 
OECT channel—also known as transconductance—displays a 
characteristic bell-shape,[91] although other authors suggest that 
this phenomenon can originate from a gate-dependent con-
tact resistance.[99] In any case, this non-monotonic trend of the 
transconductance has important consequences on the opera-
tion of OECTs in real-life scenarios, particularly in biosensing 
applications, where it is desirable for the device to be operated 
in the voltage range that maximizes this figure of merit.[91,100]
If we also take into account that ion motion within the 
polymer bulk may heterogeneously alter the microstructure 
of the OMIECs, thus affecting the energy landscape of the 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
Figure 4.  Power factor versus electronic conductivity of PBTTT films 
chemically doped with F4TCNQ (circles) and F2TCNQ (squares). Repro-
duced with permission.[77] Copyright 2017, The Authors, published by 
American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted/adapted 
from ref. [77] © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee 
American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under 
a CC BY-NC 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (10 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
semiconductor (i.e., the DOS), the description just provided for 
the charge-density-dependent mobility becomes more compli-
cated.[101–104] In a general sense, investigating the contribution 
of ionic transport to the OMIEC tunable conductivity is a non-
trivial task. Ion-transport models are not only dependent on the 
OMIECs properties, but also on the nature of the ionic species, 
as well as on the characteristics of the liquid or solid electrolyte 
matrix. While electrical and optical measurements can be used 
to deconvolute the electronic and ionic contributions, and thus 
selectively probe ion transport, they generally require either 
dedicated experimental apparatuses or complex data interpreta-
tion based on equivalent circuit models.[105,106] For a long time, 
OECTs were considered an instrumental testbed for decoupling 
ion and electron transport in OMIECs, following the general 
depiction of ionic motions provided by the Bernard–Malliaras 
model, where lateral ionic drift and/or diffusion are not con-
templated. The Bernard–Malliaras representation has been 
recently improved with more sophisticated 2D drift–diffusion 
models, which account for ion and hole conductions both along 
the channel of the OECT and its normal axis.[100,107–109] Further-
more, increasing consideration is being devoted to quantifying 
and modeling contact resistance effects in OECTs, again with 
the goal of understanding how the energetic and microstruc-
tural features of OMIECs affect charge injection and transport 
in the material.[99,109–111]
As evident from the above discussion, when reviewing the 
electrical tuning of the conductivity in OMIECs it is inevitable 
to refer continuously to the OECT. This pervasive electronic 
device is in fact a unique tool for investigating these charge 
modulation phenomena, while simultaneously being the device 
platform that most benefits of these fundamental studies. 
Nonetheless, two new families of OMIEC-based devices that 
exploit the electrically tunable conductivity of this class of 
materials have very recently emerged. OMIEC-based memory 
devices on one side, and microwave metadevices on the other. 
These promising technologies take the structure and the gen-
eral idea of the OECT to tackle application scenarios that, until 
very recently, were the prerogative of inorganic or carbon-based 
non-organic materials. Recent notable examples of OMIEC-
based neuromorphic devices present architectures that are very 
similar to those of OECTs. These three-terminal devices com-
prise a pre-synaptic and a post-synaptic electrode, both made 
with OMIECs and electrically coupled through an electrolyte, 
which are fundamentally equivalent to the gate and source–
drain electrodes in OECTs, respectively. When a voltage is 
applied to the pre-synaptic electrode, the conductive state of the 
post-synaptic electrode is “written”—that is, fixed—at a prede-
termined state, and subsequently measured—or “read”—by two 
lateral electrodes. Unlike what happens in transistors, where 
the measurement of the source–drain current and the biasing 
of the device occur simultaneously, in these memristive devices 
the “write” and “read” phases are temporally separated. Because 
of their volumetric capacitance and mixed-transport charac-
teristics, OMIECs are in fact able to store and stabilize large 
amounts of electronic charge, which can be used to achieve fine 
conductance tuning over a wide dynamic range, operating at 
relatively high switching speeds and low power.[5,112,113] Besides 
the notable performances of these organic devices even when 
compared to other memristor technologies, these objects also 
bear a remarkable potential toward the implementation of arti-
ficial neural networks that can potentially integrate with living 
matter.[114]
The tunable conductivity in a common OMIEC was also 
used to actively reconfigure conventional microwave struc-
tures and metasurfaces operating in the sub-5 GHz as recently 
demonstrated in recent work by Bonacchini et  al.[115] Even in 
this case, the device structure bears many analogies to that of 
common OECTs, where a static or quasi-static potential is used 
to bias the device and tune the volumetric charge density of the 
OMIEC. The mobile free carriers in the semiconductor are then 
able to screen or dampen the high-frequency current oscilla-
tions that are generated within the metallic resonant structures 
by the impinging electromagnetic fields. In this configuration, 
the large variations in conductivity effectively tune the complex 
permittivity of the OMIEC throughout its volume, thus altering 
the response of these photonic devices with performances that 
are comparable to other state-of-the-art tuning strategies based 
on free-charge carrier modulation. In fact, with respect to other 
similar approaches based on either lumped elements (e.g., 
varactor and pin diodes), or materials such as chemical vapor 
deposited graphene and III-V compound semiconductors, the 
relatively lower charge-carrier mobility in OMIECs is likely 
compensated by the extremely large charge modulations, which 
affect the entire volume of the tuning element rather than a 2D 
layer. These results bear implications for both the advancement 
of organic electronic materials and of metadevices at large. A 
thorough microwave investigation of these materials has never 
been undertaken, and it could provide new important insight 
on the charge-transport properties of these polymer systems. 
Moreover, unlike other tuning strategies, this OMIEC-based 
approach allows the fabrication of metadevices on virtually 
any substrate, including flexible and biocompatible ones, with 
cost-effective and mass-scalable fabrication techniques. These 
advantages could prove useful toward the development of new 
wireless bioelectronic interfaces and enhance the pervasiveness 
of large-area metadevice technologies.[116]
Another promising yet relatively unexplored approach to tune 
the conductivity of OMIECs is via the absorption of photons 
leading to form electron–hole pairs, thereby increasing the 
charge density and hence the conductivity in the material. The 
physics of photostimulation in organic materials, along with 
its use in organic optoelectronic technologies, is an ongoing 
subject of study, which has been covered by excellent review 
articles.[117–119] Interestingly, it has been shown that conven-
tional hydrophobic organic semiconductors are able to support 
charge photogeneration and extraction even when immersed 
into aqueous environments. As discussed in Section 3.3, these 
developments have led to remarkable progress in the fields of 
bioelectronics—where organic photoactive films and nano-
structures are used to elicit biological activity in living cells and 
tissues—and of photocatalysis. For example, organic electrolytic 
photocapacitors operating as photodiodes in water have been 
shown by the groups of Lanzani and Głowacki.[51,54,120] From a 
fundamental point of view, it is yet unclear whether hydrated 
OMIECs are susceptible to similar optoelectronic processes, 
and whether phenomena like exciton generation and separation 
can occur within these mixed conductors, either by means of 
electrical fields or through the realization of heterojunctions. 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (11 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
For this reason, further attention should be dedicated to 
exploring this dynamic tuning strategy in OMIECs.
4.3. Color
4.3.1. Chemically Tuned Coloration
In OMIECs, optical changes in the material result from the 
introduction of mid-bandgap energetic states to the doping 
(oxidation or reduction) of the material. Key to the successful 
use of these materials in electrochromic devices is the ability 
to dope them over a large range in the bulk. ECDs are one 
of the main applications that take advantage of the coloring/
bleaching behavior of OMIECs. The molecular tunability of 
conjugated polymers has been widely utilized to afford a mul-
titude of colors. Noteworthy is the work by Prof. John Reynolds 
(Figure 5), who, through fine tuning of the conjugated back-
bones, has demonstrated that: i) the entire color wheel can be 
designed and synthesized, ii) electrochromic polymers (ECPs) 
can be readily solution-processed into large-area solid-state 
electrochromic devices, and iii) the utility of such devices in 
full-color bistable displays, energy-saving tinted windows, and 
dimmable glasses, goggles, and visors.[3,121] To afford a myriad of 
colorations as well as neutral gray, the donor–acceptor approach 
is mainly utilized to tailor the absorption spectra of desired 
polymers as illustrated in Figure  5. Common backbone engi-
neering strategies include tuning the core heterocycle choice 
(e.g., PEDOT), controlling the electron-rich/poor character, 
modulating the steric strain, as well as copolymerization.[122,123] 
Different chromophores can also be blended to afford hybrid 
colors following the classical color mixing theory. Furthermore, 
the appearance of a polymer film is impacted by other solid-
state properties such as crystallinity and molecular anisotropy. 
Electrochromics being one of the more mature OMIEC-based 
technologies to date, key lessons can be borrowed by other 
applications both from a materials and device viewpoint. How-
ever, since ECDs are commonly large (in size) and do not nec-
essarily need to operate at high speeds (switching times of 
several seconds are often acceptable), charge kinetics ought to 
be carefully considered when borrowing electrochromic mate-
rial systems for other purposes. Some of existing challenges in 
designing new ECPs include color complementarity (chromo-
phore design) and environmental stability,[9] two aspects from 
which other technologies discussed herein can benefit.
Though not as intuitive as it is the case for backbone engi-
neering, sidechains also play a role in the coloration of polymer 
OMIECs. The exemplar structure PAT, once flanked with 
branched and bulky sidechains such as ethylhexyloxy at the 3 
and 4 positions, appears orange in its neutral state. The color 
can be redshifted by replacing the branched sidechains with 
the hexagonally linked and more electron-rich ethylenedioxy 
to form PEDOT, which forms a blue film. This substitution 
tunes the ionization potential and affords an energy bandgap 
of 1.6 eV. In the case of 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene (ProDOT) 
and dioxythiophene (DOT) and corresponding derivatives, side-
chain branching has also shown to significantly tune the col-
oration of these EC polymers.[126] Further design strategies on 
utilizing sidechains to control color have been reviewed more 
extensively elsewhere.[9,121] For the current discussion, the 
readers are reminded that when designing/selecting sidechains 
in OMIECs, their impact on film formation, crystallization, and 
resulting absorption properties should be considered according 
to intended applications.
Chemical dopants can be introduced into OMIECs to modify 
their coloration. For instance, electron-rich chemical dopants 
such as 4(1,3 dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)
phenyl)dimethylamine (N-DMBI)[127] or amines[18] can be used 
to donate electrons into electron-deficient OMIECs. The injec-
tion of electrons into the LUMO of n-type OMIECs increases 
the optical bandgap of the OMIEC, thereby bleaching the 
absorption of the backbone. Simultaneously, polarons are 
formed with energy levels within the bandgap, which absorb 
photons at lower energies in the IR. This results in an increase 
in transparency of the OMIEC in the visible range. On the 
other hand, electron-deficient dopants such as F4TCNQ can 
be used to extract electrons from the HOMO of low ioniza-
tion potential, typically p-type OMIECs. This also increases the 
optical bandgap of the OMIEC and forms positive polarons. 
Conversely, amines have been utilized to inject electrons into 
the highly depleted HOMO of PEDOT:PSS. This results in the 
reverse effect, the de-doping of the OMIEC, thereby turning the 
polymer from an almost transparent film into darker shades 
of blue in the visible region.[18] Controlling the transparency of 
OMIECs in the visible region and their absorption in the IR 
enables transparent yet thermally insulating windows. One 
could also envision that by controlling the dopant concentration 
in OMIEC solutions, different colored inks can be deposited 
using a single OMIEC.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
Figure 5.  Illustration of color control in OMIECs through both chemical 
and dynamic tuning. Backbone and sidechain engineering strategies, a 
multitude of colors can be synthesized and processed into films. Such 
films can controllably exhibit a colored or bleached state (i.e., electro-
chromism) upon electronically controlled ionic insertion and expulsion. 
In the chemical structures, R stands for alkyl chains which can be either 
linear or branched. Figure prepared based on data and information in 
refs. [3], [124], and [125].
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (12 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
4.3.2. Dynamically Tuned Coloration
During the electrochemical (and more generally chemical) 
doping of OMIECs, the color of the polymeric film changes, 
thereby doping the polymeric film (as illustrated in Figure 5). 
These changes can be induced by applying an electric poten-
tial on the OMIEC or via redox-active molecules that inject 
charges into the bulk of the polymer. Electrically induced color 
changes have led to electrochromic devices that can be used 
for smart windows.[128] The change in color is associated with 
the formation of the polaron (charge defect) and bipolaron in 
the film. The extent of color changes is a direct consequence 
of doping effectiveness. Spectroelectrochemical experiments in 
the visible,[13] NIR, and UV regions allow tracking the doping 
level in situ by analyzing changes in the absorption spectra, 
during electrochemical charging and discharging. The forma-
tion of the polaron and the bipolaron is usually associated with 
quenching of the main visible peak of the pristine polymer and 
the formation of another peak in the NIR, and the spectra pre-
sent isosbestic points.
Another approach to change the perceived color of con-
jugated polymers is to control the film thickness at the 
nanoscale. Jonsson and co-workers proposed this novel 
method by depositing PEDOT:tosylate on a metallic surface, 
controlling film thickness by varying the UV exposure time 
for vapor film polymerization.[129] This tunability of structural 
color through light manipulation in conductive polymers has 
made the materials appealing for optical coatings or multi-
functional displays.
4.4. Volume
4.4.1. Tuning Volume Chemically
The ability of a polymer material to accommodate ionic spe-
cies into its bulk is an indicator of its performance in OMIEC 
devices. Intuitively, a volumetric change will occur in the 
polymer film during the charging and discharging of the 
polymer film to compensate for the ionic flux which compen-
sates the change in electronic carrier density. As previously 
hinted, a balance between how much electrolyte embeds into 
the film, the induced bulky swelling, and resulting property 
changes constitutes the puzzle of how a given OMIEC func-
tions. Relating the sidechain choice to ionic conductivity and 
volumetric changes in a given electrolyte should thus always 
be evaluated when benchmarking novel materials. On this 
front, sidechains’ linkage position away from the backbone,[130] 
their hydrophilicity,[22,131] and length[132] have been shown to 
impact the swelling of the polymer film, and hence, electro-
chemical performance of the device. Since these sidechain 
engineering strategies are also known to impact polymer crys-
tallinity and electronic conductivity, we believe this is one of 
the areas of study for OMIECs that deserve more attention to 
drive the field forward. Fortunately, several in situ characteri-
zation techniques (e.g., moving front experiments, spectroelec-
trochemistry, X-ray crystallography)[133] have recently shown 
that these properties can be deconvoluted thus guiding new 
material designs.
4.4.2. Changing Volume Dynamically
OMIECs oxidation and reduction processes can cause signifi-
cant changes in the volume of the polymer. The migration of 
the charged species inside the bulk of the OMIECs when 
external stimuli are applied causes the polymer to swell and, 
as the process is reversed, shrink. The expansion or contrac-
tion movements of the material can be linear, volumetric, or 
a bending movement.[134] Despite working at the low voltages 
(<1  V),  electrochemically  driven changes occur up to 40% for 
reversible OMIECs devices in the out of plane direction.
The reversible nature of the shrinking and swelling charac-
teristic of the changes in volume, light weight, as well as the 
biocompatibility of the materials, allow OMIECs to be excellent 
candidates to be used as actuators mimicking human muscle. 
Electrochemically triggered OMIECs-based actuators are com-
monly used for many applications, from the biomedical field (as 
they work in aqueous at room-temperature environment, as the 
body fluids) to soft robotics.[135] During the actuation process, 
many different phenomena explain the reversible changes in 
volume concur ions and solvent exchange between the polymer 
and the electrolyte, as well as electrostatic repulsion between 
similarly charged backbones and conformational changes of 
the latter. Due to the slow kinetics of ion uptake, OMIECs actu-
ators are relatively slow (maximum switching speed between 
oxidized and reduced states is 1 Hz for films 1 µm thick).[135] 
McCulloch and co-workers showed that reducing the length of 
polymer sidechains allows the shorter chains to fill the voids 
between polymeric chains, thus preventing ion intercalation 
and reducing water intake, thus resulting in a smaller volume 
swelling.[136] A way to increase the volume expansion up to 
300% was found by Berggren and co-workers, by designing 
structures that facilitate the intercalation of hydrated ions into 
the OMIEC bulk.[137] In their work, carbon monofilaments were 
coated with the OMIEC, promoting the OMIEC’s transition 
between solid state and gel phase when oxidation-reduction 
potentials are applied.
In addition to electrical stimulation, volumetric swelling of 
OMIECs can also be achieved by faradaic charge transfer reac-
tions while immersed in an aqueous electrolyte. For instance, 
electrochemical actuators can be powered by OMIECs func-
tionalized with enzymes to catalyze the reaction of metabolites 
such as glucose, enabling self-powered artificial muscles.[47] 
Harvesting energy from the environment to power soft actua-
tors opens potential venues in smart stimuli-responsive soft 
robots and microfluidic valves.
4.5. Modulus
4.5.1. Tuning the Modulus Chemically
Though organic materials are commonly considered “soft” 
compared to inorganics, imparting mechanical deformability 
in conjugated polymer thin films remains challenging. Engi-
neering approaches are still required in order to mimic the flex-
ibility and stretchability as found in nature (e.g., human skin). 
The key challenge is to design materials that combine mechan-
ical deformability with electronic performance. The backbone 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (13 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
engineering strategies we discussed above for OMIECs, though 
beneficial to the electronic conduction, tend to yield highly crys-
talline and brittle polymers that are not suitable for applications 
such as actuators and bioconformable electronics. Currently, 
we find that little has been done on designing and processing 
intrinsically deformable OMIECs, in part due to the widespread 
use of PEDOT:PSS which is typically softened using addi-
tives.[21,138,139] The study of mechanical properties in OMIECs 
is thus regarded as a research opportunity to enable electronic 
devices that can conform with biological tissues or functional 
as soft actuators. For instance, conjugation break spacers 
have been heavily studied and copolymerization of fully con-
jugated blocks with spacer-bearing blocks are well understood 
in FETs. We envision that these approaches will translate well 
to polymer OMIECs along with other engineering approaches 
such as nanoconfinement and molecular additives used to tune 
the mechanical properties.[21,140–144]
Similar to most properties of OMIECs, control of the mor-
phology and nanoscale interactions of OMIECs can heavily 
influence mechanical properties. In polymeric OMIECs, 
mechanical properties such as modulus, breaking strength, and 
elastic limit are intimately linked to the size, distribution, and 
amount of crystalline aggregates in the material. For example, 
controlling these aggregates has led to the development of 
seemingly “rigid” (i.e., high modulus) polymer semiconductors 
that display remarkable flexibility and maintain electronic trans-
port properties by inducing nanoconfinement of the polymer 
and reducing aggregate size.[24] These developments have long-
reaching applications in biosensing, flexible thermoelectrics, 
and even artificial skin.[25] This versatility further highlights 
that understanding material microstructure is not only of fun-
damental interest, but is also of immense practical importance, 
as microstructure impacts properties seemingly as disparate as 
electronic and mechanical properties. Such complexity in the 
microstructure of OMIECs thus complicates the fundamental 
understanding of device operation. During OMIEC operation 
in electrochemical transistor applications for example, signifi-
cant volume expansion occurs concomitant with disruption to 
the ordered regions due to penetration of ions into the bulk 
during the volumetric charging process.[26] Furthermore, the 
exact nature of interaction between penetrating ions and the 
OMIEC is poorly understood and perhaps beyond the scope of 
this perspective. For a detailed overview on the current under-
standing of microstructural changes during device operation, 
readers are pointed to a recent review by Wu et al.[28]
5. Closing Remarks
The ability to simultaneously control the ionic, electronic, 
and chemical properties of OMIECs throughout the bulk ren-
ders them a multifunctional class of materials. For instance, a 
single MIEC polymer has been utilized as a sensing electrode, 
an OECT channel material, an energy-storage electrode, and 
electrochemical actuators proving the potential of OMIECs to 
enable the fabrication of a fully autonomous intelligent system 
that utilizes a single material fashioned into specific varied 
geometries for different device functions. Furthermore, such 
multifunctionality of OMIECs promises a circular economy 
of organic electronic devices. At the device’s end of life, the 
functional OMIEC can be recovered and repurposed for a new 
device (e.g., a battery electrode into an OECT channel). Judi-
cious design of sidechains can enable the dissolution of the 
OMIEC in solvents orthogonal to their operational electrolyte, 
enabling the selective recovery of OMIECs. With increased 
interest in understanding biospheres (soil, water, and air moni-
toring) and biological systems (agriculture and healthcare), 
materials that are designed to interface seamlessly with organic 
and aqueous environments are desirable. The ability to derive 
organic precursors for the synthesis of OMIECs from naturally 
occurring sources as well as their ease in solution processibility 
may allow OMIECs to aid in sustainability efforts and the pro-
gress to achieving a circular economy of electronic devices.
Desired properties can be achieved during initial synthesis 
and processing where chemical design of the conjugated 
backbone, sidechains, additives, processing solvents, and 
other conditions provide several degrees of freedom to influ-
ence the OMIECs’ chemistry and morphology. These param-
eters, in addition to the existing parameters of conventional 
device design such as device geometry, provide almost infi-
nite possibilities in device functionalities. Furthermore, these 
properties can be dynamically tuned via external stimuli such 
as electrical fields and chemical species, allowing the OMIEC 
to respond to a variety of environmental inputs and trans-
duce these into outputs of disparate physical and chemical 
natures.
While organic synthesis provides an almost infinite toolbox 
for designing OMIECs from their chemical structures all the 
way to morphology, understanding how backbone and side-
chain design, additives, and processing methods influence 
polymer morphology, and hence second-order properties, 
remains an open challenge in the field. Understanding these 
structure–function relationships is imperative for designing 
high-performance OMIEC-based devices. Additionally, it is 
important to understand how OMIEC structure and properties 
change dynamically in response to external stimuli. These can 
be achieved by in-operando measurements such as in situ elec-
trochemical grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray dcattering and 
spectroelectrochemistry which illuminate how the microstruc-
ture and optical properties of OMIECs change under applied 
voltages respectively. We envision that more in situ techniques 
will be developed in future to probe other combinations of 
input stimuli and OMIEC property changes to drive deeper 
understanding of OMIEC operation under dynamic conditions. 
Insights from these in situ experiments would then inform 
design criteria for the synthetic design of chemical structure 
and morphology of OMIECs.
The gargantuan effort to design OMIECs, understand their 
structure–property relationships, understand how these proper-
ties modulate in response to external stimuli, and strategically 
utilize OMIECs for various sensing, logic, actuation, energy 
harvesting/storage, and communication applications requires 
cross-disciplinary teams of chemists, physicists, material sci-
entists, as well as bio-, chemical, electronic, computational, 
and mechanical engineers. We hope that this perspective high-
lights the potential of OMIECs in addressing salient challenges 
in society such as energy, sustainability, healthcare, and the 
Internet of Things.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (14 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Acknowledgements
S.T.M.T. and A.S. gratefully acknowledge financial support from the 
National Science Foundation, CBET Award# 1804915, DMR Award# 
1808401, and from the Stanford Graduate Fellowship (Chevron 
Fellowship). A.G. acknowledges support from a postdoctoral fellowship 
from the Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials (GLAM) at Stanford 
University. G.E.B. gratefully acknowledges support from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the 
Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 838799 – LEAPh. T.J.Q. and 
G.S.L. acknowledge the support from the National Science Foundation 
Graduate Research Fellowship Program under grant DGE-1656518.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
bioelectronics, conjugated polymers, mixed conductors, organic 
electronics
Received: December 21, 2021
Revised: February 7, 2022
Published online: April 18, 2022
[1]	 B. D. Paulsen, K. Tybrandt, E. Stavrinidou, J. Rivnay, Nat. Mater. 
2020, 19, 13.
[2]	 J.  Rivnay, S.  Inal, A.  Salleo, R. M.  Owens, M.  Berggren,  
G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 3, 17086.
[3]	 P. M. Beaujuge, J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 268.
[4]	 D.  Melling, J. G.  Martinez, E. W. H.  Jager, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 
1808210.
[5]	 Y. van de Burgt, A. Melianas, S. T. Keene, G. Malliaras, A. Salleo, 
Nat. Electron. 2018, 1, 386.
[6]	 A.  Gumyusenge, A.  Melianas, S. T.  Keene, A.  Salleo, Annu. Rev. 
Mater. Res. 2021, 51, 47.
[7]	 T. Someya, Z. Bao, G. G. Malliaras, Nature 2016, 540, 379.
[8]	 F.  Torricelli, D. Z.  Adrahtas, Z.  Bao, M.  Berggren, F.  Biscarini, 
A.  Bonfiglio, C. A.  Bortolotti, C. D.  Frisbie, E.  Macchia,  
G. G.  Malliaras, I.  McCulloch, M.  Moser, T.-Q.  Nguyen,  
R. M.  Owens, A.  Salleo, A.  Spanu, L.  Torsi, Nat. Rev. Methods 
Primers 2021, 1, 66.
[9]	 X. Li, K. Perera, J. He, A. Gumyusenge, J. Mei, J. Mater. Chem. C 
2019, 7, 12761.
[10]	 L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik, J. R. Reynolds, 
Adv. Mater. 2000, 12, 481.
[11]	 X. Luo, H. Shen, K. Perera, D. T. Tran, B. W. Boudouris, J. Mei, ACS 
Macro Lett. 2021, 10, 1061.
[12]	 A. Giovannitti, C. B. Nielsen, D.-T. Sbircea, S. Inal, M. Donahue, 
M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, 
I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 13066.
[13]	 D. Moia, A. Giovannitti, A. A. Szumska, I. P. Maria, E. Rezasoltani, 
M.  Sachs, M.  Schnurr, P. R. F.  Barnes, I.  Mcculloch, J.  Nelson, 
Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 1349.
[14]	 J. Surgailis, A. Savva, V. Druet, B. D. Paulsen, R. Wu, A. Hamidi-
Sakr, D. Ohayon, G. Nikiforidis, X. Chen, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, 
S. Inal, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2010165.
[15]	 X. Chen, A. Marks, B. D. Paulsen, R. Wu, R. B. Rashid, H. Chen, 
M. Alsufyani, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 
60, 9368.
[16]	 I. P. Maria, B. D. Paulsen, A. Savva, D. Ohayon, R. Wu, R. Hallani, 
A. Basu, W. Du, T. D. Anthopoulos, S. Inal, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, 
A. Giovannitti, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008718.
[17]	 S. Che, L. Fang, Chem 2020, 6, 2558.
[18]	 S. T. Keene, T. P. A. van der Pol, D. Zakhidov, C. H. L. Weijtens, 
R. A. J. Janssen, A. Salleo, Y. van de Burgt, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 
2000270.
[19]	 D.  Kiefer, A.  Giovannitti, H.  Sun, T.  Biskup, A.  Hofmann, 
M. Koopmans, C. Cendra, S. Weber, L. J. Anton Koster, E. Olsson, 
J.  Rivnay, S.  Fabiano, I.  McCulloch, C.  Müller, ACS Energy Lett. 
2018, 3, 278.
[20]	 C. Y. Yang, Y. F. Ding, D. Huang, J. Wang, Z. F. Yao, C. X. Huang, 
Y.  Lu, H. I.  Un, F. D.  Zhuang, J. H.  Dou, C.  an Di, D.  Zhu,  
J. Y. Wang, T. Lei, J. Pei, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 3292.
[21]	 J. W. Onorato, C. K. Luscombe, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 2019, 4, 310.
[22]	 L. Q.  Flagg, C. G.  Bischak, J. W.  Onorato, R. B.  Rashid,  
C. K. Luscombe, D. S. Ginger, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 4345.
[23]	 A.  Giovannitti, D.-T.  Sbircea, S.  Inal, C. B.  Nielsen, E.  Bandiello, 
D. A. Hanifi, M. Sessolo, G. G. Malliaras, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 12017 LP.
[24]	 J. Xu, S. Wang, G. J. N. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Luo, L. Jin, X. Gu, S. Chen, 
V. R. Feig, J. W. F. To, S. Rondeau-Gagné, J. Park, B. C. Schroeder, 
C. Lu, J. Y. Oh, Y. Wang, Y. H. Kim, H. Yan, R. Sinclair, D. Zhou, 
G. Xue, B. Murmann, C. Linder, W. Cai, J. B. H. Tok, J. W. Chung, 
Z. Bao, Science 2017, 355, 59.
[25]	 A. Chortos, J. Liu, Z. Bao, Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 937.
[26]	 R.  Giridharagopal, L. Q.  Flagg, J. S.  Harrison, M. E.  Ziffer, 
J. Onorato, C. K. Luscombe, D. S. Ginger, Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 737.
[27]	 M.  Matta, R.  Wu, B. D.  Paulsen, A. J.  Petty, R.  Sheelamanthula, 
I. McCulloch, G. C. Schatz, J. Rivnay, Chem. Mater. 2020, 32, 7301.
[28]	 R. Wu, M. Matta, B. D. Paulsen, J. Rivnay, Chem. Rev. 2022, 122, 
4493.
[29]	 B. Russ, A. Glaudell, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc, R. A. Segalman, 
Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, 16050.
[30]	 J. Kawahara, P. A. Ersman, I. Engquist, M. Berggren, Org. Electron. 
2012, 13, 469.
[31]	 F. Hu, Y. Xue, J. Xu, B. Lu, Front. Rob. AI 2019, 6, 114.
[32]	 M.  Jakešová, T. A.  Sjöström, V.  Đerek, D.  Poxson, M.  Berggren,  
E. D. Głowacki, D. T. Simon, npj Flexible Electron. 2019, 3, 14.
[33]	 B. Rivkin, C. Becker, F. Akbar, R. Ravishankar, D. D. Karnaushenko, 
R. 
Naumann, 
A. 
Mirhajivarzaneh, 
M. 
Medina-Sánchez, 
D.  Karnaushenko, O. G.  Schmidt, Adv. Intell. Syst. 2021, 3, 
2000238.
[34]	 O. Kanoun, A. Bouhamed, R. Ramalingame, J. R. Bautista-Quijano, 
D. Rajendran, A. Al-Hamry, Sensors 2021, 21, 341.
[35]	 R. D.  Rodriguez, S.  Shchadenko, G.  Murastov, A.  Lipovka, 
M.  Fatkullin, I.  Petrov, T. H.  Tran, A.  Khalelov, M.  Saqib,  
N. E. Villa, V. Bogoslovskiy, Y. Wang, C. G. Hu, A. Zinovyev, W. Sheng,  
J. J.  Chen, I.  Amin, E.  Sheremet, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 
2008818.
[36]	 A. Giovannitti, R. B. Rashid, Q. Thiburce, B. D. Paulsen, C. Cendra, 
K.  Thorley, D.  Moia, J. T.  Mefford, D.  Hanifi, D.  Weiyuan, 
M. Moser, A. Salleo, J. Nelson, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, Adv. Mater. 
2020, 32, 1908047.
[37]	 M.  Ghittorelli, L.  Lingstedt, P.  Romele, N. I.  Craˇciun,  
Z. M.  Kovács-Vajna, P. W. M.  Blom, F.  Torricelli, Nat. Commun. 
2018, 9, 1441.
[38]	 S. T.  Keene, D.  Fogarty, R.  Cooke, C. D.  Casadevall, A.  Salleo, 
O. Parlak, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2019, 8, 1901321.
[39]	 C.  Pitsalidis, A. M.  Pappa, M.  Porel, C. M.  Artim, G. C.  Faria,  
D. D. Duong, C. A. Alabi, S. Daniel, A. Salleo, R. M. Owens, Adv. 
Mater. 2018, 30, 1803130.
[40]	 X. Zeng, K. Qu, A. Rehman, Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 1624.
[41]	 X.  Strakosas, M.  Bongo, R. M.  Owens, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2015, 
132, 41735.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (15 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
[42]	 S.  Pirsa, Mater. Sci. Eng.: Concepts, Methodol., Tools, Appl. 2017, 
1–3, 543.
[43]	 A. Koklu, D. Ohayon, S. Wustoni, A. Hama, X. Chen, I. McCulloch, 
S. Inal, Sens. Actuators, B 2021, 329, 129251.
[44]	 G.  Méhes, A.  Roy, X.  Strakosas, M.  Berggren, E.  Stavrinidou,  
D. T. Simon, Adv. Sci. 2020, 7, 2000641.
[45]	 S. T. M.  Tan, S.  Keene, A.  Giovannitti, A.  Melianas, M.  Moser, 
I. McCulloch, A. Salleo, J. Mater. Chem. C 2021, 9, 12148.
[46]	 S. T. M. Tan, A. Giovannitti, A. Melianas, M. Moser, B. L. Cotts, 
D.  Singh, I.  McCulloch, A.  Salleo, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 
2010868.
[47]	 F. Mashayekhi Mazar, J. G. Martinez, M. Tyagi, M. Alijanianzadeh, 
A. P. F. Turner, E. W. H. Jager, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1901677.
[48]	 D. Ji, T. Li, J. Liu, S. Amirjalayer, M. Zhong, Z. Y. Zhang, X. Huang, 
Z. Wei, H. Dong, W. Hu, H. Fuchs, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 12.
[49]	 X. Huang, D. Ji, H. Fuchs, W. Hu, T. Li, ChemPhotoChem 2020, 4, 
9.
[50]	 D.  Ghezzi, M. R.  Antognazza, R.  Maccarone, S.  Bellani, 
E. Lanzarini, N. Martino, M. Mete, G. Pertile, S. Bisti, G. Lanzani, 
F. Benfenati, Nat. Photonics 2013, 7, 400.
[51]	 D.  Rand, M.  Jakešová, G.  Lubin, I.  Vėbraitė, M.  David-Pur, 
V. Đerek, T. Cramer, N. S. Sariciftci, Y. Hanein, E. D. Głowacki, Adv. 
Mater. 2018, 30, 1707292.
[52]	 B.  Kolodziejczyk, C. H.  Ng, X.  Strakosas, G. G.  Malliaras, 
B. Winther-Jensen, Mater. Horiz. 2018, 5, 93.
[53]	 J. F. Maya-Vetencourt, D. Ghezzi, M. R. Antognazza, E. Colombo, 
M.  Mete, P.  Feyen, A.  Desii, A.  Buschiazzo, M.  Di Paolo, S.  Di 
Marco, F.  Ticconi, L.  Emionite, D.  Shmal, C.  Marini, I.  Donelli, 
G.  Freddi, R.  Maccarone, S.  Bisti, G.  Sambuceti, G.  Pertile, 
G. Lanzani, F. Benfenati, Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 681.
[54]	 M. Jakešová, M. Silverå Ejneby, V. Đerek, T. Schmidt, M. Gryszel, 
J.  Brask, R.  Schindl, D. T.  Simon, M.  Berggren, F.  Elinder,  
E. D. Głowacki, Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaav5265.
[55]	 M.  Silverå Ejneby, M.  Jakešová, J. J.  Ferrero, L.  Migliaccio, 
I.  Sahalianov, Z.  Zhao, M.  Berggren, D.  Khodagholy, V.  Đerek,  
J. N.  Gelinas, E. D.  Głowacki, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2021,  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-021-00817-7.
[56]	 G. Tullii, F. Gobbo, A. Costa, M. R. Antognazza, Adv. Sustainable 
Syst. 2021, 5, 2100048.
[57]	 F. Benfenati, G. Lanzani, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021, 16, 1333.
[58]	 D.  Palanker, E. D.  Głowacki, D.  Ghezzi, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021, 
16, 1330.
[59]	 T.  Paltrinieri, L.  Bondi, V.  Đerek, B.  Fraboni, E.  Daniel Głowacki, 
T. Cramer, T. Paltrinieri, L. Bondi, B. Fraboni, T. Cramer, V. Đerek, 
E. D. Głowacki, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2010116.
[60]	 F.  Di Maria, F.  Lodola, E.  Zucchetti, F.  Benfenati, G.  Lanzani, 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, 47, 4757.
[61]	 R. Wei, M. Gryszel, L. Migliaccio, E. D. Głowacki, J. Mater. Chem. 
C 2020, 8, 10897.
[62]	 F.  Milos, G.  Tullii, F.  Gobbo, F.  Lodola, F.  Galeotti, C.  Verpelli, 
D.  Mayer, V.  Maybeck, A.  Offenhäusser, M. R.  Antognazza, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 23438.
[63]	 J. F.  Maya-Vetencourt, G.  Manfredi, M.  Mete, E.  Colombo, 
M.  Bramini, S.  Di Marco, D.  Shmal, G.  Mantero, M.  Dipalo, 
A. Rocchi, M. L. DiFrancesco, E. D. Papaleo, A. Russo, J. Barsotti, 
C.  Eleftheriou, F.  Di Maria, V.  Cossu, F.  Piazza, L.  Emionite, 
F.  Ticconi, C.  Marini, G.  Sambuceti, G.  Pertile, G.  Lanzani, 
F. Benfenati, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2020, 15, 698.
[64]	 M. Sytnyk, M. Jakešová, M. Litviňuková, O. Mashkov, D. Kriegner, 
J.  Stangl, J.  Nebesářová, F. W.  Fecher, W.  Schöfberger,  
N. S.  Sariciftci, R.  Schindl, W.  Heiss, E. D.  Głowacki, Nat. 
Commun. 2017, 8, 91.
[65]	 S.  Bellani, M. R.  Antognazza, F.  Bonaccorso, S.  Bellani, 
F. Bonaccorso, G. Labs, M. R. Antognazza, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 
1801446.
[66]	 M. Gryszel, E. D. Głowacki, Chem. Commun. 2020, 56, 1705.
[67]	 H.  Bronstein, C. B.  Nielsen, B. C.  Schroeder, I.  McCulloch, Nat. 
Rev. Chem. 2020, 4, 66.
[68]	 A.  Giovannitti, I. P.  Maria, D.  Hanifi, M. J.  Donahue, D.  Bryant, 
K. J.  Barth, B. E.  Makdah, A.  Savva, D.  Moia, M.  Zetek,  
P. R. F. Barnes, O. G. Reid, S. Inal, G. Rumbles, G. G. Malliaras, 
J. Nelson, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 2945.
[69]	 M.  Heeney, C.  Bailey, K.  Genevicius, M.  Shkunov, D.  Sparrowe, 
S. Tierney, I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 1078.
[70]	 M. R.  Andersson, O.  Thomas, W.  Mammo, M.  Svensson, 
M. Theander, O. Inganäs, J. Mater. Chem. 1999, 9, 1933.
[71]	 D. J. Crouch, P. J. Skabara, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, D. Sparrowe, 
S. J.  Coles, M. B.  Hursthouse, Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2008, 
29, 1839.
[72]	 I. McCulloch, C. Bailey, M. Giles, M. Heeney, I. Love, M. Shkunov, 
D. Sparrowe, S. Tierney, Chem. Mater. 2005, 17, 1381.
[73]	 Y. Wang, M. D. Watson, Macromolecules 2008, 41, 8643.
[74]	 S. T. M.  Tan, T. J.  Quill, M.  Moser, G.  Lecroy, X.  Chen, Y.  Wu,  
C. J.  Takacs, A.  Salleo, A.  Giovannitti, ACS Energy Lett. 2021, 6, 
3450.
[75]	 J. F.  Ponder Jr, H.  Chen, A. M. T.  Luci, S.  Moro, M.  Turano,  
A. L. Hobson, G. S. Collier, L. M. A. Perdigão, M. Moser, W. Zhang, 
G. Costantini, J. R. Reynolds, I. McCulloch, ACS Mater. Lett. 2021, 
3, 1503.
[76]	 R. J. Mortimer, K. R. Graham, C. R. G. Grenier, J. R. Reynolds, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2009, 1, 2269.
[77]	 S. N.  Patel, A. M.  Glaudell, K. A.  Peterson, E. M.  Thomas,  
K. A. O’Hara, E. Lim, M. L. Chabinyc, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1700434.
[78]	 D.  Ohayon, G.  Nikiforidis, A.  Savva, A.  Giugni, S.  Wustoni, 
T. Palanisamy, X. Chen, I. P. Maria, E. Di Fabrizio, P. M. F. J. Costa, 
I. McCulloch, S. Inal, Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 456.
[79]	 C. B.  Nielsen, A.  Giovannitti, D.-T.  Sbircea, E.  Bandiello,  
M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, M. Sessolo, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, 
J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 10252.
[80]	 M.  Moser, A.  Savva, K.  Thorley, B. D.  Paulsen, T. C.  Hidalgo, 
D.  Ohayon, H.  Chen, A.  Giovannitti, A.  Marks, N.  Gasparini, 
A. Wadsworth, J. Rivnay, S. Inal, I. McCulloch, Angew. Chem., Int. 
Ed. 2021, 60, 7777.
[81]	 A.  Savva, R.  Hallani, C.  Cendra, J.  Surgailis, T. C.  Hidalgo, 
S. Wustoni, R. Sheelamanthula, X. Chen, M. Kirkus, A. Giovannitti, 
A.  Salleo, I.  McCulloch, S.  Inal, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 
1907657.
[82]	 D. Kiefer, R. Kroon, A. I. Hofmann, H. Sun, X. Liu, A. Giovannitti, 
D.  Stegerer, A.  Cano, J.  Hynynen, L.  Yu, Y.  Zhang, D.  Nai,  
T. F.  Harrelson, M.  Sommer, A. J.  Moulé, M.  Kemerink,  
S. R.  Marder, I.  McCulloch, M.  Fahlman, S.  Fabiano, C.  Müller, 
Nat. Mater. 2019, 18, 149.
[83]	 R.  Noriega, J.  Rivnay, K.  Vandewal, F. P. V.  Koch, N.  Stingelin, 
P. Smith, M. F. Toney, A. Salleo, Nat. Mater. 2013, 12, 1038.
[84]	 K.  Gu, C. R.  Snyder, J.  Onorato, C. K.  Luscombe, A. W.  Bosse, 
Y.-L. Loo, ACS Macro Lett. 2018, 7, 1333.
[85]	 C.  Scharsich, R. H.  Lohwasser, M.  Sommer, U.  Asawapirom, 
U. Scherf, M. Thelakkat, D. Neher, A. Köhler, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: 
Polym. Phys. 2012, 50, 442.
[86]	 R.  Steyrleuthner, M.  Schubert, I.  Howard, B.  Klaumünzer, 
K. Schilling, Z. Chen, P. Saalfrank, F. Laquai, A. Facchetti, D. Neher, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 18303.
[87]	 J.  Rivnay, S.  Inal, B. A.  Collins, M.  Sessolo, E.  Stavrinidou, 
X.  Strakosas, C.  Tassone, D. M.  Delongchamp, G. G.  Malliaras, 
Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11287.
[88]	 S. K. M.  Jönsson, J.  Birgerson, X.  Crispin, G.  Greczynski, 
W.  Osikowicz, A. W.  Denier van der Gon, W. R.  Salaneck, 
M. Fahlman, Synth. Met. 2003, 139, 1.
[89]	 D. A. Mengistie, M. A. Ibrahem, P.-C. Wang, C.-W. Chu, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6, 2292.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (16 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
[90]	 A.  Håkansson, S.  Han, S.  Wang, J.  Lu, S.  Braun, M.  Fahlman, 
M. Berggren, X. Crispin, S. Fabiano, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. 
Phys. 2017, 55, 814.
[91]	 J. T. Friedlein, R. R. McLeod, J. Rivnay, Org. Electron. 2018, 63, 398.
[92]	 S. Inal, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1767.
[93]	 I. Sahalianov, S. K. Singh, K. Tybrandt, M. Berggren, I. Zozoulenko, 
RSC Adv. 2019, 9, 42498.
[94]	 S. Wang, M. Ha, M. Manno, C. Daniel Frisbie, C. Leighton, Nat. 
Commun. 2012, 3, 1210.
[95]	 B. D. Paulsen, C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 3132.
[96]	 C. M.  Proctor, J.  Rivnay, G. G.  Malliaras, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: 
Polym. Phys. 2016, 54, 1433.
[97]	 J. T. Friedlein, J. Rivnay, D. H. Dunlap, I. McCulloch, S. E. Shaheen, 
R. R. McLeod, G. G. Malliaras, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 111, 023301.
[98]	 J. T. Friedlein, S. E. Shaheen, G. G. Malliaras, R. R. McLeod, Adv. 
Electron. Mater. 2015, 1, 1500189.
[99]	 V.  Kaphle, S.  Liu, A.  Al-Shadeedi, C. M.  Keum, B.  Lüssem, Adv. 
Mater. 2016, 28, 8766.
[100]	 D. Tu, S. Fabiano, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2020, 117, 080501.
[101]	 C. Cendra, A. Giovannitti, A. Savva, V. Venkatraman, I. McCulloch, 
A. Salleo, S. Inal, J. Rivnay, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807034.
[102]	 B. D.  Paulsen, R.  Wu, C. J.  Takacs, H. G.  Steinrück, J.  Strzalka, 
Q. Zhang, M. F. Toney, J. Rivnay, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2003404.
[103]	 T. J.  Quill, G.  LeCroy, A.  Melianas, D.  Rawlings, Q.  Thiburce, 
R.  Sheelamanthula, C.  Cheng, Y.  Tuchman, S. T.  Keene, 
I.  McCulloch, R. A.  Segalman, M. L.  Chabinyc, A.  Salleo, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104301.
[104]	 L. Q.  Flagg, C. G.  Bischak, R. J.  Quezada, J. W.  Onorato,  
C. K. Luscombe, D. S. Ginger, ACS Mater. Lett. 2020, 2, 254.
[105]	 M. Sheliakina, A. B. Mostert, P. Meredith, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 
28, 1805514.
[106]	 E.  Stavrinidou, P.  Leleux, H.  Rajaona, D.  Khodagholy, J.  Rivnay, 
M. Lindau, S. Sanaur, G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 4488.
[107]	 M. Z.  Szymanski, D.  Tu, R.  Forchheimer, IEEE Trans. Electron 
Devices 2017, 64, 5114.
[108]	 V. Kaphle, P. R. Paudel, D. Dahal, R. K. Radha Krishnan, B. Lüssem, 
Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 2515.
[109]	 P. R. Paudel, V. Kaphle, D. Dahal, R. K. Radha Krishnan, B. Lüssem, 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2004939.
[110]	 F. Bonafè, F. Decataldo, B. Fraboni, T. Cramer, Adv. Electron. Mater. 
2021, 7, 2100086.
[111]	 A. F.  Paterson, H.  Faber, A.  Savva, G.  Nikiforidis, M.  Gedda,  
T. C. Hidalgo, X. Chen, I. McCulloch, T. D. Anthopoulos, S. Inal, 
Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1902291.
[112]	 E. J.  Fuller, S. T.  Keene, A.  Melianas, Z.  Wang, S.  Agarwal, Y.  Li, 
Y.  Tuchman, C. D.  James, M. J.  Marinella, J. J.  Yang, A.  Salleo,  
A. A. Talin, Science 2019, 364, 570.
[113]	 A.  Melianas, T. J.  Quill, G.  LeCroy, Y.  Tuchman, H. V.  Loo,  
S. T.  Keene, A.  Giovannitti, H. R.  Lee, I. P.  Maria, I.  McCulloch, 
A. Salleo, Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eabb2958.
[114]	 S. T. Keene, C. Lubrano, S. Kazemzadeh, A. Melianas, Y. Tuchman, 
G.  Polino, P.  Scognamiglio, L.  Cinà, A.  Salleo, Y.  van de  Burgt, 
F. Santoro, Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 969.
[115]	 G. E. Bonacchini, F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Electron. 2021, 4, 424.
[116]	 Z. Li, X. Tian, C.-W. Qiu, J. S. Ho, Nat. Electron. 2021, 4, 382.
[117]	 O. Ostroverkhova, Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 13279.
[118]	 K. J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi, Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater. 
2013, 25, 4267.
[119]	 C. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2020, 49, 653.
[120]	 M. R.  Antognazza, D.  Ghezzi, D.  Musitelli, M.  Garbugli, 
G. Lanzani, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94, 243501.
[121]	 C. M. Amb, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater. 2011, 23, 397.
[122]	 C. K. Lo, D. E. Shen, J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules 2019, 52, 6773.
[123]	 D. T. Christiansen, A. L. Tomlinson, J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2019, 141, 3859.
[124]	 C. M.  Amb, A. L.  Dyer, J. R.  Reynolds, C. M.  Amb, A. L.  Dyer,  
J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater. 2011, 23, 397.
[125]	 A. L. Dyer, E. J. Thompson, J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Inter-
faces 2011, 3, 1787.
[126]	 S. L. Pittelli, M. De Keersmaecker, J. F. Ponder Jr, A. M. Österholm, 
M. A. Ochieng, J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. C 2020, 8, 683.
[127]	 O. Bardagot, C. Aumaître, A. Monmagnon, J. Pécaut, P.-A. Bayle, 
R. Demadrille, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2021, 118, 203904.
[128]	 C. W.  Chang-Jian, E. C.  Cho, S. C.  Yen, B. C.  Ho, K. C.  Lee,  
J. H. Huang, Y. S. Hsiao, Dyes Pigm. 2018, 148, 465.
[129]	 S. Chen, S. Rossi, R. Shanker, G. Cincotti, S. Gamage, P. Kühne, 
V. Stanishev, I. Engquist, M. Berggren, J. Edberg, V. Darakchieva, 
M. P. Jonsson, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2102451.
[130]	 P.  Schmode, A.  Savva, R.  Kahl, D.  Ohayon, F.  Meichsner, 
O. Dolynchuk, T. Thurn-Albrecht, S. Inal, M. Thelakkat, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029.
[131]	 Y. Wang, E. Zeglio, H. Liao, J. Xu, F. Liu, Z. Li, I. Petruta Maria, 
D. Mawad, A. Herland, I. McCulloch, W. Yue, Chem. Mater. 2019, 
31, 9797.
[132]	 M.  Moser, L. R.  Savagian, A.  Savva, M.  Matta, J. F.  Ponder, 
T. Cecilia Hidalgo, D. Ohayon, R. Hallani, M. Reisjalali, A. Troisi, 
A. Wadsworth, J. R. Reynolds, S. Inal, I. McCulloch, Chem. Mater. 
2020, 32, 6618.
[133]	 B. D.  Paulsen, A.  Giovannitti, R.  Wu, J.  Strzalka, Q.  Zhang, 
J. Rivnay, C. J. Takacs, Small 2021, 17, 2103213.
[134]	 L.  Bay, K.  West, P.  Sommer-Larsen, S.  Skaarup, M.  Benslimane, 
Adv. Mater. 2003, 15, 310.
[135]	 H.  Stoyanov, M.  Kollosche, S.  Risse, R.  Waché, G.  Kofod, Adv. 
Mater. 2013, 25, 578.
[136]	 M.  Moser, J.  Gladisch, S.  Ghosh, T. C.  Hidalgo, J. F.  Ponder, 
R.  Sheelamanthula, Q.  Thiburce, N.  Gasparini, A.  Wadsworth, 
A.  Salleo, S.  Inal, M.  Berggren, I.  Zozoulenko, E.  Stavrinidou, 
I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2100723.
[137]	 J.  Gladisch, E.  Stavrinidou, S.  Ghosh, A.  Giovannitti, M.  Moser, 
I.  Zozoulenko, I.  McCulloch, M.  Berggren, Adv. Sci. 2020, 7, 
1901144.
[138]	 V. R.  Feig, H.  Tran, M.  Lee, Z.  Bao, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 
2740.
[139]	 S.  Savagatrup, E.  Chan, S. M.  Renteria-Garcia, A. D.  Printz,  
A. V. Zaretski, T. F. O’Connor, D. Rodriquez, E. Valle, D. J. Lipomi, 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 427.
[140]	 A.  Gumyusenge, D. T.  Tran, X.  Luo, G. M.  Pitch, Y.  Zhao,  
K. A. Jenkins, T. J. Dunn, A. L. Ayzner, B. M. Savoie, J. Mei, Science 
2018, 362, 1131.
[141]	 A.  Gumyusenge, X.  Luo, H.  Zhang, G. M.  Pitch, A. L.  Ayzner, 
J. Mei, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2019, 1, 1778.
[142]	 S. E. Root, S. Savagatrup, A. D. Printz, D. Rodriquez, D. J. Lipomi, 
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 6467.
[143]	 B.  Roth, S.  Savagatrup, N. V.  de  los Santos, O.  Hagemann,  
J. E. Carlé, M. Helgesen, F. Livi, E. Bundgaard, R. R. Søndergaard, 
F. C. Krebs, D. J. Lipomi, Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 2363.
[144]	 S.  Savagatrup, A. D.  Printz, T. F.  O’Connor, A. V.  Zaretski,  
D. J. Lipomi, Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 3028.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (17 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Siew Ting Melissa Tan earned her bachelor’s in engineering in materials science and engineering 
with a specialization in nanotechnology from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore in 2018 
where she was an Agency for Science, Technology and Research scholar, CN Yang scholar, and 
Koh Boon Hwee scholar. She is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in materials science and engineering 
at Stanford University with Prof. Alberto Salleo, supported by a Stanford Graduate Fellowship and 
a National University of Singapore Development Grant. Her Ph.D. work focuses on the funda-
mental understanding of organic mixed conductors for electrochemical devices, organic transis-
tors, biosensors, and energy-storage devices.
Aristide Gumyusenge received a B.S. in chemistry from Wofford College (2015), a Ph.D. in 
chemistry from Purdue University (2019), and was the GLAM Postdoctoral Fellow at Stanford 
University. In 2022, he joined MIT as an Assistant, where he holds the Merton C. Flemings 
Career Development Professorship. His research interests are in semiconducting polymers, their 
processing and characterization, and their unique role in future electronics. He has been selected 
as a PMSE Future Faculty Scholar, the GLAM Postdoctoral Fellow, the MRS Arthur Nowick and 
Graduate Student Gold Awardee, amongst other recognitions.
Tyler James Quill is a doctoral candidate in the Materials Science and Engineering Department 
at Stanford University. His research focuses on understanding the structure–property relations 
in neuromorphic devices and artificial synapses based on organic mixed conductors. He is a 
National Science Foundation graduate research fellow and a U.S. Department of Energy Office of 
Science graduate research fellow.
Garrett Swain LeCroy is a Ph.D. candidate at Stanford University working under the supervision 
of Alberto Salleo. He graduated from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2018 with his B.S. in 
materials science and engineering. He is interested in fundamental light–matter interactions in 
disordered semiconductors and uses spectroscopy to study charge-transport properties. He is a 
National Science Foundation graduate research fellow.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2110406  (18 of 18)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Giorgio E. Bonacchini received his Ph.D. from Politecnico di Milano, working at the Center for 
Nano Science and Technology of the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia. He then joined the Silklab at 
Tufts University, where he developed the first demonstration of microwave metadevices based 
on organic electrochemical transistors. As of July 2020, he has been a Marie Skłodowska-Curie 
Actions Global Fellow working in the Salleo Group at Stanford University, where he is studying the 
optoelectronic properties of organic semiconductors and mixed ion–electron conductors, with a 
focus on the development of water-gated organic phototransistors and microwave metadevices.
Ilaria Denti received her bachelor’s and master’s degree in physics at the Universita’ degli Studi 
di Milano. She is currently finishing her Ph.D. in materials engineering at Politecnico di Milano 
in the laboratory of Prof. Chiara Castiglioni. In 2019, during her Ph.D. she joined the laboratory of 
Prof. Alberto Salleo as a visiting scholar at Stanford University, where she currently continues her 
research activity. The main focus of her work is the use of vibrational spectroscopy to characterize 
the charge defect (i.e., polarons) of doped semiconductive polymers, developing novel setups for 
in situ characterization.
Alberto Salleo is Professor of Materials Science and Department Chair at Stanford University. He 
has a Ph.D. in materials science from UC Berkeley and was post-doc, then staff member at Xerox 
PARC. In 2005 he joined the Materials Science and Engineering Department at Stanford as an 
Assistant Professor. At Stanford, he won the NSF Career Award, the 3M Untenured Faculty Award, 
the SPIE Early Career Award, and the Gores Award for Excellence in Teaching, Stanford’s highest 
teaching award. He has been a Clarivate Highly Cited Researcher since 2015 and was elected to 
the European Academy of Sciences in 2021.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2110406
 15214095, 2022, 21, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202110406 by University Of Chicago Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

