Inﬂuence of Water on the Performance of Organic Electrochemical
Transistors
Achilleas Savva,† Camila Cendra,∥Andrea Giugni,‡ Bruno Torre,‡ Jokubas Surgailis,† David Ohayon,†
Alexander Giovannitti,⊥Iain McCulloch,§,⊥Enzo Di Fabrizio,‡ Alberto Salleo,∥Jonathan Rivnay,#
and Sahika Inal*,†
†Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering, ‡SMILEs laboratory, Physical Science and Engineering (PSE), and §PSE,
KAUST Solar Center (KSC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia
∥Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
⊥Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London SW72AZ, U.K.
#Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, United States
*
S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs)
composed of organic mixed conductors can operate in aqueous,
biological media and translate low-magnitude ionic ﬂuctuations
of biological origin into measurable electrical signals. The
growing technological interest in these biotransducers makes the
fundamental understanding of ion-to-electron coupling ex-
tremely important for the design of new materials and devices.
One crucial aspect in this process that has been so far
disregarded is the water taken up by the ﬁlm during device
operation and its eﬀects on device performance. Here, using a
series of the same electrolyte with varying ion concentrations,
we quantify the amount of water that is incorporated into a hydrophilic p-type organic semiconductor ﬁlm alongside the dopant
anions and investigate structural and morphological changes occurring in the ﬁlm upon electrochemical doping. We show that
inﬁltration of the hydrated dopant ions into the ﬁlm irreversibly changes the polymer structure and negatively impacts the
eﬃciency, reversibility, and speed of charge generation. When less water is injected into the channel, OECTs exhibit higher
transconductance and faster switching speeds. Although swelling is commonly suggested to be a necessity for eﬃcient ion-to-
electron transduction, this work uncovers the negative impact of a swollen channel material on the performance of accumulation
mode OECTs and lays the foundation for future materials design.
■INTRODUCTION
Organic semiconductors revolutionized the way we look at
electronic materials due to their molecularly tunable electrical
properties in combination with their soft mechanical proper-
ties. Importantly, their ability to conduct ionic in addition to
electronic charges has attracted broad interest, particularly for
the ﬁeld of bioelectronics.1 In biological systems, signal
transmission involves ionic ﬂuxes that arise due to local
transport of ions or charged neurotransmitters across cell
membranes.2 To transduce these signals, organic semi-
conductors that accommodate mixed conduction, i.e., organic
mixed conductors, have shown great potential.3 To this end,
electronic devices based on organic semiconductors have led to
state-of-the-art biosensors including implantable electrode
arrays for measuring cortical neural signals,4 impedance-
based cell monitoring devices,5 and metabolite sensors.6,7
Among these devices, organic electrochemical transistors
(OECTs) that operate in aqueous electrolytes are particularly
interesting for transducing and amplifying low amplitude ionic
ﬂuctuations of biological origin.8
In an OECT, the application of a gate bias drives ions into
the channel that electrostatically compensate for the electronic
charges provided by the source electrode. The channel is made
of an organic mixed conductor that can undergo reversible
changes in its doping state by exchanging ions with an aqueous
electrolyte, i.e., the biological media. A typical material for
OECTs is the p-type semiconducting polymer poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(styrenesulfonate)
(PEDOT:PSS).9 While such conducting polymer-based
OECTs operate in depletion mode, it is also possible to
operate OECTs in accumulation mode if the channel is made
of a semiconducting polymer permeable to ions.10 These
polymers consist of a conjugated backbone modiﬁed with side
Received:
October 12, 2018
Revised:
January 3, 2019
Published: January 4, 2019
Article
pubs.acs.org/cm
Cite This: Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
© 2019 American Chemical Society
927
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
Downloaded via UNIV OF CHICAGO on December 28, 2021 at 21:19:22 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

chains that are either charged (known as conjugated
polyelectrolytes) or carry nonionic but polar chemical units
(e.g., ethylene glycol).11 The rationale of the side chain
modiﬁcation is to promote interactions of the rather
hydrophobic backbone with water, enabling ion penetration/
transport within the channel. With tailored molecular designs,
accumulation mode materials can be further customized based
on the need of the applications, e.g., enable speciﬁc
associations with proteins/cells or adhere stronger to surfaces
that they are cast on.12 A recent example for such polymers is
the p-type poly(2-(3,3′-bis(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)-
ethoxy)-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)thieno[3,2-b] thiophene), p-
(g2T-TT), which has shown superior OECT performance
compared to state-of-the-art PEDOT:PSS-based devices.13
Regardless of the mode of operation, the identifying character-
istic of OECTs is the volumetric interactions of the electrolyte
ions with the channel.14 The extent of these interactions
governs the transconductance of the device, i.e., the trans-
duction of an ionic ﬂux into an electronic current.1,15
While a number of studies have investigated electrochemical
processes in PEDOT:PSS and the depletion mode
OECTs,16−18 the electrochemical phenomena at the aqueous
interface of undoped, single-component semiconducting
polymer ﬁlms remain rather unexplored. However, the ion
injection process and mixed transport properties of these
semiconducting polymers are expected to be inherently
diﬀerent compared with PEDOT:PSS: the latter swells almost
double its thickness/volume when immersed in water due to
the hydrophilic polyanion phase (i.e., PSS), and cation
transport takes place in this swollen phase, a region (almost)
physically separated from PEDOT.19 Semiconducting poly-
mers with grafted hydrophilic side chains, on the other hand,
do not contain such a bulky ionic phase. Therefore, our gap in
knowledge, ﬁrst, resides in understanding the route of ions
inside these ﬁlms. Second, little is known about how the
polymeric network is aﬀected by the encounter with dopant
ions. In this context, Guardado et al. have revealed changes in
lattice spacing and crystallite orientation in the bulk of the
semiconducting polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)
induced upon electrochemical doping by an ionic liquid.20
The dopant ions are dragged into the crystalline regions when
a low-frequency, high-amplitude voltage bias is applied across
the polymer ﬁlm. Such intercalation of dopant molecules in
crystallites has also been observed when P3HT was chemically
doped with tetraﬂuorotetracyanoquinodimethane, leading to
more oligomer-like chains with low hole mobility.21 Giridhar-
agopal et al., on the other hand, showed that amorphous
regions of a P3HT ﬁlm undergoes subnanometer swelling as
dopant anions from an aqueous electrolyte penetrate into the
ﬁlm.22 These studies evidence a signiﬁcant, voltage-dependent
distortion of the polymer lattice/nanomorphology upon ion-
induced doping, which are likely to have consequences on the
charge transport as well as on the operation of OECTs. Finally,
during the operation of OECTs in aqueous electrolytes, in
addition to dopant ions, the polymer ﬁlm also interacts with
water. The electrolyte ions are hydrated,23 and as such, their
drift in and out of the polymeric channel might/can involve a
signiﬁcant amount of water molecules. In fact, we have recently
shown that when exposed to dedoping potentials, PEDOT:PSS
ﬁlms undergo signiﬁcant volumetric expansion due to uptake
not only of cations but also of water, and they shrink as water
and cations are ejected from the ﬁlm.19 A recent study of
Ginger and co-workers demonstrated the eﬀect of the
hydration state of dopant anions on the electrochemical
doping of P3HT.24 The ions with high hydration numbers in
water allow water to enter the hydrophobic ﬁlm, which slows
the transistors and increases the threshold voltage. In contrast
to P3HT, the aforementioned hydrophilic semiconducting
polymers can swell with water, which is the feature that
primarily renders them suitable for OECTs.13 However,
because of the single-component nature of these polymers,
water uptake during doping should have implications on the
microstructure and transport properties as well as on the
output characteristics of OECTs comprising these polymers.
Monitoring such in-operando bulk structural and morphological
state of the ﬁlm and linking it to the extent of swelling and the
device performance can give us important guidelines to design
mixed conductors showing favorable ion−polymer interac-
tions, i.e., high transconductance in OECTs.
In this study, we investigate the impact of water on the
electrochemical behavior of the top OECT performer p-type
semiconductor, p(g2T-TT), in aqueous NaCl solutions of
varying salt concentrations. Because the hydration of the
dopant anion, i.e., Cl−, gradually increases with a decrease in
electrolyte concentration,25 we can modulate the hydration of
the ﬁlm without changing the nature of the dopant. Doping the
ﬁlms in these electrolytes allows us to control the extent of
water/polymer interactions and to monitor the inﬂuence of
channel hydration on OECT operation. By using electro-
chemical quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitor-
ing (EQCM-D), we ﬁnd that a signiﬁcant amount of water is
incorporated into the ﬁlm during electrochemical doping,
increasing with a decrease in electrolyte concentration. The
water taken up by the ﬁlm has two main adverse eﬀects: (1) it
limits the speed of electrochemical switching, and (2) it
impairs the reversibility of the doping process. We perform ex-
situ grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS)
studies and in-situ Raman spectroscopy to understand the
consequences of hydration on the polymer microstructure. The
rather drastic and permanent lamellar expansion upon doping
conﬁrms that anions can inﬁltrate into the crystallites, while
water accumulates between the glycol side chains and mainly
in the amorphous regions of the ﬁlm. Excess water uptake by
these regions irreversibly disrupts the overall structural order.
The net result is a decrease in hole mobility. Consequently,
with an increase in the hydration of the OECT channel, we
measure a reduction in the transconductance. By controlling
the degree of swelling of the channeloptimized to enable
facile ion penetration, yet minimal deterioration of the ﬁlm
structurethe transconductance is maximized alongside with
an improvement of switching speeds of OECTs. These results
show that while swelling of the mixed conductor channel is
needed to enable OECT operation, it must be carefully
balanced to minimize adverse structural changes in the ﬁlm.
■EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
Materials. p(g2T-TT) was synthesized as described previously.13
All the other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used
as received.
OECT Fabrication. The devices were fabricated according to the
parylene-C lift-oﬀmethod reported previously.26 Standard micro-
scope glass slides were cleaned via sonication in an acetone and
isopropyl alcohol solution and dried with N2. Connection pads and
interconnects were deposited through a lift-oﬀprocess using
photolithographic patterning of positive photoresist (S1813). A
subsequent metal deposition via sputtering of Cr (10 nm) and of
Au (120 nm) and metal lift-oﬀusing acetone deﬁnes the Au lines. A
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
928

ﬁrst layer of parylene C (2 μm), deposited together with a small
amount of 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (A-174 Silane) to
enhance adhesion, acts as an insulator to prevent disturbing capacitive
eﬀects at the metal liquid interface. Subsequently, an antiadhesive
layer was spin-coated using a dilution of industrial cleaner (2 wt %,
Micro-90), and a second parylene-C sacriﬁcial layer (2 μm) is
deposited. To deﬁne the contact pads and the channel of the OECT, a
second photolithographic patterning step using a thick positive
photoresist (5 μm, AZ9260) and AZ developer is used to protect the
parylene-C layers from a subsequent plasma reactive ion etching step.
All the polymer solutions were prepared in chloroform at 5 mg/mL (if
not mentioned otherwise) and spin-coated from a glass ﬁber ﬁlter
with 0.45 μm pore diameter. Peeling of the parylene-C sacriﬁcial layer
deﬁnes the channel dimensions. The thickness of the channels was
measured using a DEKTAK 150 stylus proﬁlometer.
OECT Characterization. OECTs were characterized using a dual-
channel source-meter unit (NI-PXI) with custom-written control
code in LabVIEW. All measurements were performed using an Ag/
AgCl pellet (D = 2 mm × H = 2 mm; Warner Instruments) as the
gate electrode. The electrolytes in water were contained in a PDMS
well on top of the OECTs, and the electrolyte volume was constant at
80 μL for all measurements. The DC response time of the OECTs
was estimated using an exponential ﬁt to the drain current recorded
after applying a 5 ms long doping pulse at the gate electrode. The AC
response time of the OECTs was calculated via bandwidth
measurements, using the 3-dB cutoﬀfrequency equivalent to 0.707
times the peak of transconductance, also known as the half-power
point. The mobility (μOECT) was determined by applying a constant
drain bias to the channel and a sinusoidal voltage pulse at the gate
electrode (ΔVG = 10 mV) with a preset oﬀset (VG, oﬀset) and at
varying frequencies. The frequency domain relation between the
measured gate current (ΔIG) and drain current (ΔID) is27
π τ
Δ
=
Δ
I
f
f
I
f
( )
2
( )
G
e
D
(1)
Matching the gate current and drain current derived impedance yields
hole/electron transit time in the channel (τe), as detailed by Rivnay et
al.28 Using the τe, the channel length (L), and the applied drain bias
(VD), μOECT can be estimated:
μ
τ
=
L
V
OECT
2
e D
(2)
Swelling Analysis. We performed EQCM-D measurements using
a Q-sense analyzer (QE401, Biolin Scientiﬁc). Swelling measurements
were performed as follows. First, we recorded the QCM-D response
of the bare Au sensors in the air, followed by the injection of the
aqueous NaCl solutions into the chamber. This resulted in large shifts
in f and D due to the density diﬀerences between the two media,
which must be excluded from the swelling percentage calculation. The
measurements were then stopped, the sensors were removed, and
p(g2T-TT) layers were spin-coated directly on the same sensor from
a chloroform solution (5 mg/mL) at 1K rpm. We then compared the
absolute diﬀerence in f for multiple overtones between the bare sensor
and the Ti/Au/p(g2T-TT)-coated sensors, both in air and in the
corresponding NaCl solutions, by using the function “stitched data” of
Q-soft software. This function compares the selected data sets based
on the raw frequencies measured and excludes the eﬀect of the
diﬀerent densities between the two mediums (Figure S1). Thus, the
diﬀerence of the f values of the stitched data is directly analogous to
the thickness of the polymer in both media, which is calculated by
using the Sauerbrey equation (eq 3).
EQCM-D Analysis. EQCM-D measurements were performed
using Autolab PGstat128N potentiostat coupled with Q-sense
electrochemistry module. The three-electrode setup was composed
of Ag/AgCl reference, Pt counter, and Au/polymer EQCM-D sensor
as the working electrode. The physical modeling of the two measured
parameters, the f and D, is related to the viscoelastic properties of the
ﬁlm. On the one hand, a rigid ﬁlm shows zero D as there are
theoretically no energy losses (no viscoelasticity), and the Sauerbrey
equation can be used to quantify the mass (m), using only one
overtone as described in eq 3:
Δ
= −
Δ
m
n
f
17.7
n
(3)
On the other hand, a thicker and/or softer ﬁlm does not follow the
motion of the crystal and leads to energy losses during the oscillation.
We approximate thicker and/or soft ﬁlms to behave like a Kelvin−
Voigt element, which means that they exhibit both viscous and elastic
characteristics acting in parallel (viscoelastic). A Kelvin−Voigt
element has a complex shear modulus as described in eq 4:
μ
π η
* =
+
G
if
2
(4)
where G* is the complex shear modulus, μ is elasticity (kg m−1 s−2), η
is viscosity (kg m−1 s−1), and f is the frequency.
To calculate the mass changes of a thick, viscoelastic ﬁlm, the
complex shear modulus was analyzed and ﬁtted using at least three
frequency and dissipation of energy overtones. Q-Tools and D-ﬁnd
software were used for the modeling and data analysis. Because
p(g2T-TT) ﬁlms are becoming soft and uptake a signiﬁcant amount
of water under doping potentials, we used the Kelvin−Voigt
viscoelastic (VSE) model to ﬁt the data. To quantify the mass
correctly, we used the f and D data of three diﬀerent overtones (5th,
7th, and 9th). The good quality of the ﬁts guaranteed the accurate
mass calculation accumulated within the ﬁlms upon applied
potentials. To convert the recorded mass into number of Cl−ions,
we divided the recorded mass values with the weight of pure Cl−
atoms (5.88725 × 10−23 g/atom).
Electrochemical Analysis. Electrochemical impedance spectros-
copy (EIS) was performed from 10 kHz to 0.1 Hz in the EQCM-D
electrochemical cell. The measurements were performed either at Voc
or at a dc oﬀset potential (doping) with an ac amplitude of 10 mV.
The capacitance−frequency plots of each ﬁlm were constructed by
using the complex impedance formula as described in eq 5:
ω
=
+
Z
R
C
1
2
2
2
(5)
The diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the four systems under study was
calculated based on the Cottrell equation and using the raw data
obtained from the chronoamperometry, current versus time.
π
=
I
nFAc
D
t
j
j
0
(6)
where I is the current, n is the number of electronic charges (to
oxidize one molecule of the analyte (e.g., p(g2T-TT) = 1), F is the
Faraday constant (96485 C/mol), A is the area of the electrode
(0.7854 cm2), cj is the concentration of the electrolyte, Dj is the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the dopant ions in the electrolyte, and t is the
time.
X-ray Characterization. Films for ex-situ X-ray scattering were
prepared inside a N2 glovebox (<1 ppm of O2) by spin-coating a 7.5
mg/mL solution of p(g2T-TT) in chloroform heated to 60 °C onto
native oxide p+ silicon substrates at 600 rpm for 15 s and then at 1000
rpm for 60 s. Spin-coating was followed by brief drying (60 s) on a
hot plate at 60 °C and longer drying (4 h) in N2 to remove residual
solvent. Prior to coating, the solution was left stirring overnight at 60
°C and ﬁltered using a glass ﬁber ﬁlter with 0.45 μm of pore size.
Samples were measured in various conditions with two diﬀerent
NaCl(aq) concentrations: 1 M and 10 mM. For the samples that were
electrically gated, a 80 μL droplet of electrolyte was placed on a
p(g2T-TT) ﬁlm, where an Ag/AgCl pellet electrode was immersed
and a voltage was applied across the Ag/AgCl and p+ silicon substrate
electrodes. After the doping procedure, ﬁlms were rinsed in deionized
water and dried using a N2 gun. Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray
scattering (GIWAXS) was performed at the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) on beamline 11-3 using an area
detector (Rayonix MAR-225) and incident energy of 12.73 keV. The
distance between sample and detector was 320.8 mm, and it was
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
929

calibrated using a LaB6 polycrystalline standard. The incidence angle
(0.1°) was slightly larger than the critical angle, ensuring that we
sampled the full depth of the ﬁlm. All X-ray measurements were
performed in a helium environment to minimize air scattering and
beam damage to samples. Raw data were normalized by detector
counts and thickness and reduced and analyzed using a combination
of Nika 1D SAXS29 and WAXStools software packages in Igor Pro.30
Raman Spectroscopy. For the Raman spectroelectrochemical
investigation, two identically prepared p(g2T-TT) ﬁlms were spin-
coated on transparent glass/Ti-3 nm/Au-18 nm substrates fabricated
using RF magneton sputtering. The substrates were transparent and
conductive to allow both doping and access to the Raman beam. The
ﬁlms were immersed in NaCl(aq) 0.01 and 1 M solutions, and an Ag/
AgCl electrode was used for the in-situ doping experiments. The
resonant Raman spectra of the dry and wet samples were measured
using a Witec alpha Raman spectrometer with the excitation beamline
He−Ne laser of wavelength 632.8 nm and 50 μW power to avoid
photothermal eﬀects. The dispersion gratings were 600 and 1800
grooves/mm. The dry spectrum was collected with a 100× objective,
while for the spectrum of the ﬁlm in solution we used a 63× water-
compatible objective. Both objectives have a comparable spatial
resolution ∼600 nm. For each condition, we mapped the sample with
4 × 4 points to average out the representative spectrum.
Spectroelectrochemistry Measurements. Thin ﬁlms were
prepared on ITO coated glass substrates and the measurements
were carried out using a UV-vis spectrometer (OceanOptics USB
2000+) integrated with a Ivium CompactStat potentiostat. A Pt mesh
was used as the counter electrode and a Ag/AgCl electrode as the
reference electrode. The indicated voltages were applied versus VOC
(to compensate for any changes in the threshold voltage) for 10 s
until the current stabilized prior to recording of the spectrum.
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). AFM measurements were
performed in tapping mode, using Agilent 5500 SPM-AFM
equipment and Bruker AFM probes with spring constant k = 2.8
mN/cm2. The measurements were performed with two diﬀerent
p(g2T-TT) ﬁlms which were spin-coated on glass/Au substrates from
a 5 mg/mL solution in chloroform. First, we took the AFM images of
both ﬁlms in ambient conditions (as-cast). The ﬁlms were then
immersed in the corresponding electrolyte, doped at −0.5 V vs Ag/
AgCl for 5 min, dedoped at 0 V for 5 min, and dried again before
monitoring the surface in ambient conditions.
■RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Inﬂuence of Water on the Electrochemical Doping of
p(g2T-TT). The electrochemical reactions in a p-type organic
semiconductor−aqueous electrolyte system involve the in-
jection of charge carriers (e−) and penetration of hydrated ions
(A−) to compensate for these charges on the backbone of the
semiconducting polymer (P):
+
+
−
+
−
−
F
P
A
P :A
e
0
This phenomenon can be studied by EQCM-Da molecular
balance that monitors in situ changes in the mass of an
electroactive ﬁlm coated on a piezoelectric quartz crystal while
it undergoes an electrochemical reaction.31 In general, a
decrease in the oscillation frequency (f) of the QCM-D crystal
indicates an increase of its mass. For a soft ﬁlm, the decrease in
f is accompanied by an increase in the dissipation of energy
(D) as a result of energy losses during oscillations.32 To
determine the amount of water incorporated into p(g2T-TT)
during electrochemical doping, we studied the EQCM-D
response of p(g2T-TT) ﬁlms immersed in aqueous electrolytes
of four diﬀerent NaCl concentrations, i.e., NaCl(aq)10 mM, 100
mM, 1 M, and 6 M. With an increase in the concentration of
NaCl(aq), the hydration shell around the anions and the
number of ion-free water molecules within the electrolyte
solution reduce signiﬁcantly.33 By changing the electrolyte
concentration, we therefore aim to modulate the amount of
water injected into the ﬁlm alongside the Cl−ions. First, we
measure the swelling of the polymer prior to biasing, which is
due to water and passive ion diﬀusion. We ﬁnd that passive
swelling is nearly identical in all concentrations, accounting for
10−13% of mass increase (Figure S1 and Table S1). Once the
QCM-D signals (Δf and ΔD) are stabilized, i.e., p(g2T-TT)
ﬁlms are in thermodynamic equilibrium with the electrolyte,
sequential doping and dedoping potential pulses are applied,
and the corresponding changes in QCM-D signals are
recorded, as shown in Figure S2. For all the ﬁlms, the changes
in Δf and ΔD upon doping (i.e., V > open circuit voltage
(VOC) ≈0 V) indicate an increase in the mass of the ﬁlm,
which is due to uptake of Cl−ions and water molecules. When
the potential returns to VOC, the signals reverse due to
expulsion of water and Cl−ions from the ﬁlms. A schematic
representation of the ion drift in and out of the ﬁlms during the
EQCM-D measurements is shown in Figure S3. We convert
the EQCM-D signals into mass changes using viscoelastic
modeling, and the results are shown in Figure 1a,b, (see
Experimental Section for more information about the model
used). When the polymer is doped with less concentrated
NaCl(aq), the ﬁlm gains more mass for the same applied
potential. For instance, at 0.5 V, we calculate a mass increase of
5.6 μg/cm2 in NaCl(aq) 10 mM, while this value is only 2.75
μg/cm2 in NaCl(aq) 6 M. This corresponds to an increase in
mass of 86% and 42% in 10 mM and 6 M NaCl(aq) respectively,
compared with the equilibrium conditions (in the electrolyte,
before bias). In addition, when the potential is reverted to 0 V,
a fraction of the injected mass remains in the ﬁlm, which is
higher at lower NaCl concentrations (e.g., 2.61 μg/cm2 for
NaCl(aq) 10 mM and 0.49 μg/cm2 for NaCl(aq) 6 M).
Whereas the measured charge directly corresponds to the
number of doping anions in the ﬁlm, water uptake is also to be
expected. In fact, the mass calculated from the injected anions
is smaller than the measured mass (Figure S4). This
Figure 1. (a) Applied potential waveform as a function of time.
Square-shaped doping pulses are applied for 60 s and range from 0.1
to 0.5 V vs VOC, with a dedoping potential applied at 0 V lasting for
120 s in between each doping pulse. (b) Changes in the mass of the
ﬁlms when doped in four electrolytes of varying ion concentrations.
(c) Top: a schematic representation of p(g2T-TT)-NaCl(aq) system in
the EQCM-D chamber during doping in low and high concentration
electrolyte solutions. Bottom: the number of water molecules injected
into the ﬁlms at the end of the doping pulse at 0.5 V and remaining in
the ﬁlm upon the subsequent dedoping pulse applied at 0 V as a
function of NaCl concentration.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
930

discrepancy must thus correspond to the mass of water being
dragged in the polymer. The water taken up by the ﬁlms
increases with a decrease in electrolyte concentration due to
larger degree of hydration of anions therein (Figure 1c, 0.5 V).
Moreover, a fraction of water remains in the ﬁlm even after a
dedoping pulse is applied (Figure 1c, 0 V), and this is most
pronounced in dilute electrolytes. In addition, changes in the
dissipation of energy upon doping with low concentration
NaCl(aq) are larger compared to high concentration NaCl(aq)
(Figure S3), indicating that the ﬁlm becomes softer due to
increased water uptake. We note that in these solutions
osmosis also plays a role in determining the water drift. The
osmosis eﬀect is signiﬁcantly large in the case of NaCl(aq) 10
mM due to the maximized diﬀerence in solute concentration
between this electrolyte and the ﬁlm. Bay et al. suggested that
very large volume changes that polypyrrole ﬁlms undergo
during electrochemical reduction are due to the osmotic forces
which cause water molecules to move into the polymer in
quantities far in excess of those in the solvation shell of the
ions in the electrolyte.34 Similar observations are reported by
Maw and co-workers, who showed that during electrochemical
switching water is carried in and out of the polymer ﬁlms
together with electrolyte ions but also independently as a result
of osmotic pressure.35 These results evidence two important
phenomena regarding doping of an organic semiconductor in
aqueous electrolytes: (1) the dopant anions that enter the ﬁlm
are hydrated, and (2) the ﬁlm swells more upon doping with
low concentration electrolytes and retains most of these water
molecules compared with operation at high concentration
electrolytes.
The hydration of the polymer ﬁlm aﬀects also the dynamics
of ion uptake. From the mass uptake versus time curves in
Figure 1b, we calculated the time required for each p(g2T-TT)
ﬁlm to accumulate 90% of the total mass (τ) upon doping with
these solutions (Figure 2a), which is a direct measurement of
the speed of mass loading into the ﬁlm, i.e., ionic charging. The
ionic charging is slowest in NaCl(aq) 10 mM and becomes
faster as the electrolyte concentrations increases regardless of
the magnitude of the doping pulse. The fastest ionic charging
is, however, achieved at NaCl(aq) 1 M, rather than NaCl(aq) 6
M. In addition, assuming that the ion injection into p(g2T-
TT) is governed by semi-inﬁnite linear diﬀusion, we use the
Cottrell equation to extract the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of Cl−
anions. We ﬁnd that for all doping potentials the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient of the dopant increases with a decrease in
electrolyte concentration (Figure 2b). The ions in NaCl(aq) 6
M exhibit, however, the slowest diﬀusion. These results suggest
that the injection/drift of ions is strongly aﬀected by the ion−
counterion (Cl−−Na+) attractive forces which are most
pronounced in the highest concentration electrolyte. These
forces delay the ion injection from the electrolyte, opposing
their drift into p(g2T-TT). Thus, the fastest ionic charging is
achieved when the polymer ﬁlm is doped in NaCl(aq) 1 M. At
this concentration, the optimum hydration conditions are
achieved; i.e., the polymer swelling is moderate while the Cl−−
Na+ attractive forces do not signiﬁcantly hinder the drift of
anions.
To further reveal the inﬂuence of water on the speed of ionic
charging, we used electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS) which allows us to investigate ionic charging at diﬀerent
time scales. We performed EIS prior to biasing as well as at a
doping potential (V = +0.5 V vs VOC) for all the ﬁlms at
diﬀerent NaCl concentrations (Figure S5a−d). On the basis of
these impedance data, we extracted capacitance versus
frequency plots, all exhibiting a cutoﬀfrequency after which
the capacitance drops (Figure S5e,f and Figure 2c). In NaCl(aq)
1 M, the capacitance curve reaches a plateau at 8.5 Hz, i.e., a
frequency higher than all the other NaCl concentrations
studied (Figure S5f). The ionic charging of the ﬁlm is thus
fastest in NaCl(aq) 1 M, in accordance with Figure 2a.
Moreover, prior to doping, the capacitance values at low
frequencies (i.e., 0.1 Hz) are similar for all the systems (ca. 2 ×
10−4 F at 0.1 Hz, Figure S5e), which is also the case when the
samples are doped (ca. 1.8 × 10−3 F at 0.1 Hz, Figure S5f).
Based on the low-frequency capacitance of the doped
polymers, the volumetric capacitance is calculated to be 285
F/cm3, which is on par with the previously reported values
(Figure 2c).13 The same C* calculated for all the systems
under investigation means that at steady-state conditions the
number of ions injected during doping is the same regardless
of the electrolyte concentration. On the basis of our
electrochemical analysis, it is clear that more water is dragged
in the p(g2T-TT) ﬁlm when doped in less concentrated NaCl
solution. The excess water molecules lead to large volumetric
expansion of the ﬁlm and slow down the ionic charging;
Figure 2. (a) Mass loading time (τ) calculated at each doping pulse in
electrolytes of diﬀerent ion concentrations. The data are based on the
mass vs time plots of Figure 1b. (b) Diﬀusion coeﬃcient of Cl−anions
in diﬀerent electrolytes as a function of doping bias. The values are
calculated from the chronoamperometry data (Figure S4) using
Cottrell equation. (c) Volumetric capacitance of the ﬁlms as a
function of NaCl(aq) concentration measured at 0.5 V vs VOC. Error
bars correspond to standard deviation from the measured average of
four ﬁlms with the electrolytes in question.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
931

however, the charging capacity of the ﬁlm is not aﬀected by its
hydration state.
Inﬂuence of Water on the Structural Properties of
P(G2T-TT). To understand how the injected ions and water
inﬂuence the structural properties of the ﬁlm, we collected ex-
situ grazing incidence wide-angle scattering (GIWAXS)
patterns of thin ﬁlms electrochemically doped in NaCl(aq) 1
M and 10 mM. In its dry, as-cast condition, p(g2T-TT)
presents a predominantly edge-on texture,13 with lamellar and
π-stacking distances of 13.45 and 3.79 Å, respectively. As it can
be seen in Figure 3, exposure of the polymer to NaCl(aq)1 M
and NaCl(aq) 10 mM at Vapplied = 0 V does not largely aﬀect the
lattice spacing of the ordered regions (step 2). Upon
electrochemical doping (Vapplied = −0.5 V, step 3), however,
the crystallites experience a permanent expansion in the
lamellar spacing (∼14−15%) and contraction in the π−π
stacking direction (∼7−8%). A change in orientation in
reciprocal space of the π−π stacking peak position, visible in
the GIWAXS patterns (Figure S6), suggests that the crystallites
in the polymer experience a unit cell distortion upon doping.
Similar to the irreversible eﬀects of water uptake on the bulk
properties of the ﬁlm as measured by EQCM-D, dedoping the
ﬁlms (Vapplied = 0 V, step 4) does not the reverse the lattice
distortion to the initial, dry, crystal structure. As our EQCM-D
and EIS results show, upon doping anions and water penetrate
into the bulk of the polymer. The rather drastic lamellar
expansion upon doping conﬁrms that anions can also inﬁltrate
into the crystallites, likely accumulating between the glycol side
chains to compensate for electronic charges in the polymer
backbone. This is in agreement with previous literature
evidencing that electrochemical doping in nonaqueous electro-
lytes with anions larger in size than Cl−, such as BF4
−, AsF6
−,36
or bistriﬂimide (TFSI−),20 produces a lamellar expansion in
poly(3-alkylthiophenes) (i.e., P3HT) attributed to anions
being located between the alkyl chains. In p(g2T-TT),
however, due to the hydrophilic nature of the side chains
and large water uptake upon doping (Figure 1c), we also
expect water to accumulate between the side chains of the
crystallites.
The inﬂuence of water on the crystallites of the polymer is
subtle. Although water uptake in the bulk of the polymer
almost doubles when left at doped state after −0.5 V with 10
mM vs 1 M NaCl, diﬀerences in the lattice spacings of the
crystallites with salt concentration are rather small. In
comparison to ﬁlms doped with NaCl(aq) 1 M, the lamellar
spacing of ﬁlms doped with NaCl(aq)10 mM presents an
additional expansion of 0.15 Å (see Table S2), which is well
above the experimental error (∼0.01 Å). In this doping
condition, diﬀerences in π−π spacing are within the
experimental error, and thus, no comparisons can be
performed in this crystallite direction. Dedoping of the
polymer with diﬀerent electrolyte concentrations (step 4)
produces no discernible diﬀerences in the lattice spacings.
Given the small changes in lamellar spacing relative to the
molecular size of water (1.76 Å)37 and Cl−(crystal radius: 3.62
Å),37 we suggest that the small increase in lamellar expansion
when the polymer is doped with low concentration electrolytes
is due to a slight increase in water uptake by the crystallites. In
addition, the permanent changes in the crystallites induced
after doping also suggest that water could be residing in the
crystallites, even when the polymer is reduced. Complete out-
of-plane and in-plane lineouts and 2D GIWAXS patterns are
included in Figures S6 and S7.
GIWAXS data suggest that the majority of water uptake
occurs in the amorphous regions of the polymer. We thus
performed in-situ Raman spectroscopy to probe the impact of
doping on the bulk of the polymer as the technique monitors
the ﬁlm structure regardless of its crystal or amorphous content
and is sensitive to conformational changes and stacking of
conjugated components.38 The molecular structure of neutral
Figure 3. (a) Out-of-plane (qz) and in-plane (qxy) X-ray scattering lineouts for the (200) and (010) peaks, respectively, of p(g2T-TT) ﬁlms doped
with NaCl(aq) 10 mM (black lines) and NaCl(aq) 1 M (green lines). Numbers in parentheses correspond to diﬀerent conditions of the polymer: (1)
dry, as-cast, (2) immersed in electrolyte, (3) doped at 0.5 V vs VOC, and (4) subsequently dedoped at VOC. Asterisks denote position of scattering
peaks after lattice distortion induced by electrochemical doping. Dashed lines correspond to center of scattering peaks. (b) Lattice spacing values of
the π−π stacking and lamellar distances extracted from ﬁtting peak diﬀraction positions of the (010) and (200) peaks, respectively. Error bars in
lattice spacing correspond to propagated error from peak ﬁtting.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
932

p(g2T-TT) is shown in Figure 4a, depicting a distribution of
charge mainly localized around the backbone within the
aromatic thiophene−thienothiophene rings. The presence and
the degree of delocalization of π-electrons enhance and
modulate both the electronic absorption in the visible
range13 and the polarizability, resulting in a strong Raman
scattering signal, very sensitive to changes in backbone
vibrations. Figure 4b shows the high-energy Raman spectrum
of a dry p(g2T-TT) ﬁlm that consists of two distinct regions
ascribed to the backbone and the side chains. The main peaks
in the spectral region between 1200 and 1600 cm−1 are
associated with the vibrations of the backbone (which beneﬁts
from an enhanced polarizability due to the π-delocalized
electrons compared to the side chains), and in particular, the
three main visible bands (A, B, and C in Figure 4b) refer to the
in-plane ring modes: CC stretching (≃1406 cm−1,
thienothiophene core), CC symmetric stretching (≃1448
cm−1, thiophene core), and CC/C−C asymmetric stretch-
ing/shrinking collective vibrational mode (≃1494 cm−1). The
latter (peak C) is associated with oscillations of the nuclei
along the path of the molecular axis from the ground to the
excited state, sensitive to π-electron delocalization, electron−
phonon coupling, or polaron formation, and as such it is
regarded as an indicator of structural−electronic changes.39
The region below ca. 1300 cm−1, on the other hand, contains
C−C skeletal stretching and C−H bending. The C−O
vibration, indicative of the ethylene glycol side chains, is
characterized with a less pronounced nonresonant Raman line
at ca. 1100 cm−1.40
As shown in Figure 4c, exposing the ﬁlm to the
corresponding electrolyte does not aﬀect the thiophene ring
spectral region (compare step 1 with step 2). On the contrary,
the Raman spectra of both ﬁlms under investigation undergo
signiﬁcant changes as they are doped (step 3). Particularly, in
NaCl(aq) 1 M (green lines), peak B becomes broader, blue-
shifts, and nearly merges with peak A. In NaCl(aq) 10 mM, peak
B disappears while peak C increases in relative intensity and
breadth (black lines). In both electrolytes, we observe a
signiﬁcant decrease in the overall Raman spectral intensity, in
particular for peaks B and C (Figure S8). Another region that
is aﬀected by doping is the inter-ring C−C stretching vibration
at ca. 1215 and 1270 cm−1, indicating an overall reduced bond
order in the polymer backbone. This is a typical consequence
of charge redistribution that gives rise to a quinoid-type
conﬁguration, reducing the π-electron delocalization and the
degree of long-structural order in poly(thiophenes).41 The
changes in the backbone region upon doping are attributed to
the presence of Cl−ions close to the thienothiophene rings and
the formation of polarons, causing signiﬁcant distortions on
the vibrational properties of the ring bonds. These distortions
are more pronounced in NaCl(aq) 1 M compared to NaCl(aq)
10 mM. We postulate that the limited hydration of the ﬁlm in
concentrated electrolytes allows a closer interaction of ions
with the backbone.
Finally, when the potential is reversed to VOC, while the
doping-induced changes along the backbone are partially
recovered for the ﬁlm in NaCl(aq) 10 mM, these are more
reversible in NaCl(aq)1 M (Figure 4c, step 4). This result is in
accordance with our EQCM-D ﬁndingsthe fact that a
substantial amount of mass remains in the ﬁlm upon doping in
dilute electrolytes. Moreover, looking closer at the spectral
region associated with the side chains (ca. 1000−1300 cm−1),
we see that upon dedoping the formerly distinct, well-
separated peaks reappear only in NaCl(aq) 1 M, but not in
10 mM (Figure S9). On the basis of these ﬁndings, we suggest
a route for water that is inﬁltrating into the ﬁlm: water interacts
mainly with the side chains and localizes in chain interstitial
spaces, and swelling of these regions disrupts the aggregates. In
dilute electrolytes, as the doping induced hydration is high,
water irreversibly leads to structural distortions.
The eﬀect of electrochemical doping on the electronic
properties of the ﬁlm can be further investigated via
spectroelectrochemistry measurements where we monitor the
changes in the absorbance spectra of the polymer ﬁlms during
the application of a doping potential in each electrolyte. Figure
S10a shows that in all electrolytes the π−π* related absorption
peak is bleached, while the absorption of the polaronic species
increases with an increase in doping voltage. Notably, these
changes are more prominent in concentrated electrolytes
(Figure S10b,c), indicating a higher degree of anion−backbone
coupling, in agreement with our in-situ Raman spectroscopy
results. To monitor the eﬀects of electrochemical doping on
ﬁlm morphology, we next performed atomic force microscopy
(AFM) measurements. Figure S11 shows the AFM images of
two polymer ﬁlms in air before and after doping in the
electrolytes in question. The ﬁlm morphology changes
signiﬁcantly once the ﬁlms were electrochemically addressed
in either high- or low-concentration electrolyte. The
permanent changes that we observe on the ﬁlm surface agree
well with the irreversible structural distortions suggested by
Raman and GIWAXS data.
Inﬂuence of Water on the Operation of OECTs. To
understand the inﬂuence of water coupled to the polymer ﬁlm
on OECT characteristics, we characterized micrometer-scale
OECTs composed of identically prepared p(g2T-TT) channels
gated in the same four electrolytes. As shown in Figure 5a,b,
Figure 4. (a) Molecular structure of p(g2T-TT) showing the
distribution of charge, with increasing electron density from blue to
red. (b) Characteristic Raman spectrum of p(g2T-TT) ﬁlm recorded
in air. The peaks labeled with A, B, and C are attributed to CC
stretching, thienothiophene core (≃1406 cm−1), CC symmetric
stretching (≃1448 cm−1), and CC/C−C asymmetric stretching/
shrinking (≃1494 cm−1), respectively. The region between ca. 1000
and 1300 cm−1 is mainly due to the side chains. (c) Changes in the
Raman spectra of identically prepared ﬁlms during doping in NaCl(aq)
10 mM (black lines) andNaCl(aq) 1 M (green lines). The spectra were
recorded when the ﬁlm was dry, i.e., in air (1), immersed in
electrolyte (2), doped at −0.5 V vs VOC (3), and subsequently
dedoped at VOC (4).
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
933

upon application of a negative bias at the gate, the source-drain
current increases, indicative of the accumulation mode of
operation, regardless of the electrolyte concentration and the
water coupled to the channel. However, the ON current is
always higher at higher NaCl concentrations as well as the
transconductance (Figure 5a,b). We also observe a decent
increase in the threshold voltage with an increase in electrolyte
concentration (Figure S12). We hypothesize that since the
ions are less hydrated in concentrated electrolytes, the ion−
counterion forces start hindering their drift into the ﬁlm,
increasing the potential required to inject them.24 Using
bandwidth measurements (Figure S13a),28 we ﬁnd that the
hole mobility scales with the NaCl concentration: μOECT is
0.15, 0.20, 0.22, and 0.33 cm2 V−1 s−1 when doped in NaCl(aq)
10 mM, 100 mM, 1 M, and 6 M, respectively (Figure 5c). The
extent of channel swelling inﬂuences also the transient
characteristics of the OECTs. To determine the switching
speed of the transistors, we monitored the change in drain
current upon application of square voltage pulses at the gate
electrode (Figure S13b). The current−time proﬁles follow an
exponential behavior and the response times (τOECT) of the
devices are shown in Figure 5d. The devices switch ON fastest
when they are gated in NaCl(aq) 1 M, while the slowest
response is predominantly in NaCl(aq) 10 mM. At the highest
NaCl(aq) concentration (6 M), the low hydration of ions leads
to attractive forces between Cl−and Na+ counterions, which
oppose the injection of Cl−ions into the ﬁlm to compensate
for the polaron sites. Therefore, the OECTs gated in NaCl(aq)
6 M switch ON slower compared with 1 M. Similar
observations were reported by Lin et al., who show that at
high electrolyte concentrations a higher VG is required to
compensate for the potential change at the interface between
the electrolyte and a PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm.42
Together with the temporal response of the drain current,
we also measure the current ﬂowing between the gate electrode
and the channel (Figure S13c). The gate current is modulated
by the ion movement in the electrolyte, which is then
transduced as the drain current. The gate current is purely
capacitive (notice the brief spikes at the beginning and end of
the doping pulse) and should vanish at steady state. The
charge redistribution therein is thus correlated to the ionic
charge injected from the electrolyte into the channel, as the
same number of countercharges (cations) is injected to the
gate electrode. The gate electrode accumulates the largest
amount of charges at NaCl(aq) 1 M (Figure S13d), as the ionic
charging of the channel is the fastest in this electrolyte.
During the OECT operation, the channel hydrates
signiﬁcantly due to the dopant ions entering the ﬁlm with
Figure 5. Gate voltage dependence of the (a) drain current (ID) and
(b) transconductance of OECTs comprising p(g2T-TT) in the
channel (W = 100 μm, L = 10 μm, d = 120 nm). The devices are
measured in NaCl(aq) solutions of varying ion concentrations at VD =
−0.5 V. (c) Hole mobility (μOECT) of p(g2T-TT) ﬁlm as a function of
NaCl(aq) concentration, calculated from the bandwidth measurements
performed at VG = VD = −0.5 V as shown in Figure S13a. The error
bars are derived from four diﬀerent OECT channels measured at each
concentration. (d) Response time of the OECTs (τOECT) as a
function of NaCl concentration measured at VG = VD = −0.5 V.
Figure 6. Schematic representation of an OECT channel composed of p(g2T-TT) and gated with an Ag/AgCl electrode immersed in NaCl(aq)
solutions with diﬀerent ion concentrations. The magniﬁed region depicts the polymer−electrolyte interface and the diﬀerences in the swelling
behavior of the ﬁlm in low- and high-concentration electrolyte.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
934

their hydration shell. When the device is operated in low
concentration NaCl(aq), where Cl−ions drag more water with
them during their drift, the channel swells more compared with
when doping in high concentration electrolytes. As the ﬁlm
swells, it becomes softer (see the large changes in dissipation in
Figure S2b). The more water the ﬁlm gains upon doping, the
less it can lose upon dedoping. The osmosis eﬀect also
contributes to the extensive swelling observed in low-
concentration electrolytes: the doping potential pushes anions
into a small volume of the polymer ﬁlm; therefore, a large
diﬀerence in ion concentration occurs between the electrolyte
and the ﬁlm. This enables free water molecules spontaneously
moving into the ﬁlm, most pronounced in dilute electrolytes.
Figure 6 depicts the diﬀerent swelling behavior of the channel
when gated in low- and high-concentration electrolytes.
The water drifting into the ﬁlm aﬀects the polymer structure
as well as the hole transport therein. Water causes a large
volumetric expansion of the polymer ﬁlm, but the swelling is
not uniform throughout the bulk. Ex-situ GIWAXS measure-
ments suggest that water molecules reside mostly in the
disordered regions of the polymer, while anions accumulate
among the side chains (in the interlamellar region of the
crystallites) to compensate for electronic charges, possibly
bringing along some water into the crystallites. In-situ Raman
measurements reveal that side chains remain distorted upon a
doping/dededoping cycle in low concentration NaCl(aq). The
large water cloud around the side chains and in amorphous
regions would result in an overall heterogeneous swelling of
the polymer ﬁlm upon doping: while these parts of the ﬁlm
swell with water, the crystalline regions show only a small
extension in lamella spacing. Such a morphology may not be
ideal for charge transport, loosening the connectivity of the
crystallites that are responsible for charge transport. In fact, we
ﬁnd that hole mobility decreases as the channel swells further.
Moreover, we postulate that the anions shed the outer water
molecules around the side chains, and as such their doping
ability becomes independent of the electrolyte concentration.
Accordingly, we measure similar capacitance values at low
frequencies in all electrolytes, while hole transport is aﬀected
by the electrolyte concentration.
These structural changes have consequences on device
performance. The transconductance (gm) of the OECTs scales
with the product of the volumetric capacitance (C*) and the
hole mobility (μ) according to
μ
=
*
−
g
d C
V
V
(
)
W
L
m
T
G . As the
capacitance is not aﬀected by the channel hydration, it is the
higher hole mobility that is responsible for the higher
transconductance when the channel hydration is limited. The
ON/OFF ratio of the OECTs is also higher when gated with
high-concentration electrolytes. The eﬀect of water uptake is
not limited to the steady-state characteristics of the OECTs. At
low concentration electrolytes, the number of ions per unit
volume is low, leading to a high electrolyte resistance (Figure
S5, note the electrolyte resistance at high frequency).
Considering that ionic transit time is τ = RC,27 where R is
the electrolyte resistance and C is the capacitance of the ﬁlm,
the increase in electrolyte resistance slows the OECTs. In
addition to that, for a rapidly switching channel, the ions need
to move fast within the ﬁlm to reach the polaron sites, and at
the same time the electronic carriers need to travel along the
channel. At low concentration electrolytes, ionic charging of
the ﬁlm is delayed accompanied by a reduction in hole
mobility, another reason why hydration of the channel leads to
slow switching speeds in OECTs.
■CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we showed, for the ﬁrst time, the inﬂuence of
water on the doping, structure, and transport properties of a
new class of amphiphilic organic semiconductors. Rather than
using diﬀerent anions with varying hydration behavior or
changing the polymer hydrophilicity, we simply change the
electrolyte concentration to modulate the hydration properties
of the dopant. This gives us a handle to solely observe the
water drift in and out of the ﬁlms and its consequences in
device performance. The polymer ﬁlm requires an optimum
degree of hydration for eﬃcient electrochemical doping in
aqueous electrolytes as well as for fast and high gain
accumulation mode OECTs. However, controlling the swelling
of the channel can maximize the ON currents alongside an
improvement of switching speeds since water accumulating in
the ﬁlm leads to structural changes that impair the hole
mobility. Importantly, these results evidence major diﬀerences
of these polymers compared to PEDOT based systems which
are used in depletion mode devices where hydration is always
beneﬁcial for device operation. We suggest that minimizing the
volumetric expansion of the polymer ﬁlms during doping could
be a key parameter to design fast and highly eﬃcient ion-to-
electron transduction devices. This work presents a solid
understanding of the impact of hydration of mixed conductors
on the operation of accumulation mode OECTs and lays the
foundation for future design of eﬃcient ion-to-electron
transducers.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
S
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemma-
ter.8b04335.
Swelling and EQCM-D measurements and analysis, EIS,
GIWAXS, Raman spectroscopy, spectroelectrochemistry,
AFM and transient OECT measurements (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail sahika.inal@kaust.edu.sa.
ORCID
Jonathan Rivnay: 0000-0002-0602-6485
Sahika Inal: 0000-0002-1166-1512
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr. George Nikiforidis for fruitful
discussions. J.R. acknowledges support from the National
Science Foundation (Grant NSF DMR-1751308). A.S. and
C.C. acknowledge support from the NSF (Grant NSF DMR-
1808401). Portions of this research were performed at the
Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, a national user
facility operated by Stanford University on behalf of the U.S.
Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
935

■REFERENCES
(1) Inal, S.; Malliaras, G. G.; Rivnay, J. Benchmarking organic mixed
conductors for transistors. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 1767.
(2) Uzman, A. Molecular biology of the cell, 4th ed. Alberts, B.;
Johnson, A.; Lewis, J.; Raff, M.; Roberts, K.; Walter, P. Biochem. Mol.
Biol. Educ. 2003, 31 (4), 212−214.
(3) Martin, D. C.; Malliaras, G. G. Interfacing Electronic and Ionic
Charge Transport in Bioelectronics. ChemElectroChem. 2016, 3 (5),
686−688.
(4) Lee, W.; Kim, D.; Matsuhisa, N.; Nagase, M.; Sekino, M.;
Malliaras, G. G.; Yokota, T.; Someya, T. Transparent, conformable,
active multielectrode array using organic electrochemical transistors.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017, 114 (40), 10554−10559.
(5) Curto, V. F.; Marchiori, B.; Hama, A.; Pappa, A.-M.; Ferro, M.
P.; Braendlein, M.; Rivnay, J.; Fiocchi, M.; Malliaras, G. G.; Ramuz,
M.; Owens, R. M. Organic transistor platform with integrated
microfluidics for in-line multi-parametric in vitro cell monitoring.
Microsys. Nanoeng. 2017, 3, 17028.
(6) Pappa, A.-M.; Parlak, O.; Scheiblin, G.; Mailley, P.; Salleo, A.;
Owens, R. M. Organic Electronics for Point-of-Care Metabolite
Monitoring. Trends Biotechnol. 2018, 36 (1), 45−59.
(7) Pappa, A. M.; Ohayon, D.; Giovannitti, A.; Maria, I. P.; Savva,
A.; Uguz, I.; Rivnay, J.; McCulloch, I.; Owens, R. M.; Inal, S. Direct
metabolite detection with an n-type accumulation mode organic
electrochemical transistor. Sci. Adv. 2018, 4 (6), No. eaat0911.
(8) Rivnay, J.; Inal, S.; Salleo, A.; Owens, R. M.; Berggren, M.;
Malliaras, G. G. Organic electrochemical transistors. Nat. Rev. Mater.
2018, 3, 17086.
(9) Khodagholy, D.; Rivnay, J.; Sessolo, M.; Gurfinkel, M.; Leleux,
P.; Jimison, L. H.; Stavrinidou, E.; Herve, T.; Sanaur, S.; Owens, R.
M.; Malliaras, G. G. High transconductance organic electrochemical
transistors. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2133.
(10) Inal, S.; Rivnay, J.; Leleux, P.; Ferro, M.; Ramuz, M.; Brendel, J.
C.; Schmidt, M. M.; Thelakkat, M.; Malliaras, G. G. A High
Transconductance Accumulation Mode Electrochemical Transistor.
Adv. Mater. 2014, 26 (44), 7450−7455.
(11) Inal, S.; Rivnay, J.; Suiu, A.-O.; Malliaras, G. G.; McCulloch, I.
Conjugated Polymers in Bioelectronics. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (6),
1368−1376.
(12) Du, W.; Ohayon, D.; Combe, C.; Mottier, L.; Maria, I. P.;
Ashraf, R. S.; Fiumelli, H.; Inal, S.; McCulloch, I. Improving the
Compatibility of Diketopyrrolopyrrole Semiconducting Polymers for
Biological Interfacing by Lysine Attachment. Chem. Mater. 2018, 30
(17), 6164−6172.
(13) Giovannitti, A.; Sbircea, D.-T.; Inal, S.; Nielsen, C. B.;
Bandiello, E.; Hanifi, D. A.; Sessolo, M.; Malliaras, G. G.; McCulloch,
I.; Rivnay, J. Controlling the mode of operation of organic transistors
through side-chain engineering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2016,
113 (43), 12017−12022.
(14) Laiho, A.; Herlogsson, L.; Forchheimer, R.; Crispin, X.;
Berggren, M. Controlling the dimensionality of charge transport in
organic thin-film transistors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2011, 108
(37), 15069−15073.
(15) Rivnay, J.; Leleux, P.; Ferro, M.; Sessolo, M.; Williamson, A.;
Koutsouras, D. A.; Khodagholy, D.; Ramuz, M.; Strakosas, X.; Owens,
R. M.; Benar, C.; Badier, J.-M.; Bernard, C.; Malliaras, G. G. High-
performance transistors for bioelectronics through tuning of channel
thickness. Sci. Adv. 2015, 1 (4), No. e1400251.
(16) Inal, S.; Malliaras, G. G.; Rivnay, J. Optical study of
electrochromic moving fronts for the investigation of ion transport
in conducting polymers. J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4 (18), 3942−3947.
(17) Volkov, A. V.; Wijeratne, K.; Mitraka, E.; Ail, U.; Zhao, D.;
Tybrandt, K.; Andreasen, J. W.; Berggren, M.; Crispin, X.;
Zozoulenko, I. V. Understanding the Capacitance of PEDOT:PSS.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 27 (28), 1700329.
(18) Rivnay, J.; Inal, S.; Collins, B. A.; Sessolo, M.; Stavrinidou, E.;
Strakosas, X.; Tassone, C.; Delongchamp, D. M.; Malliaras, G. G.
Structural control of mixed ionic and electronic transport in
conducting polymers. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11287.
(19) Savva, A.; Wustoni, S.; Inal, S. Ionic-to-electronic coupling
efficiency in PEDOT:PSS films operated in aqueous electrolytes. J.
Mater. Chem. C 2018, 6, 12023−12030.
(20) Guardado, J. O.; Salleo, A. Structural Effects of Gating Poly(3
hexylthiophene) through an Ionic Liquid. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 27
(32), 1701791.
(21) Chew, A. R.; Salleo, A. Spectroscopic studies of dopant-induced
conformational changes in poly(3-hexylthiophene) thin films. MRS
Commun. 2017, 7 (3), 728−734.
(22) Giridharagopal, R.; Flagg, L. Q.; Harrison, J. S.; Ziffer, M. E.;
Onorato, J.; Luscombe, C. K.; Ginger, D. S. Electrochemical strain
microscopy probes morphology-induced variations in ion uptake and
performance in organic electrochemical transistors. Nat. Mater. 2017,
16, 737.
(23) Ohtaki, H.; Radnai, T. Structure and dynamics of hydrated
ions. Chem. Rev. 1993, 93 (3), 1157−1204.
(24) Flagg, L. Q.; Giridharagopal, R.; Guo, J.; Ginger, D. S. Anion-
Dependent Doping and Charge Transport in Organic Electrochemical
Transistors. Chem. Mater. 2018, 30 (15), 5380−5389.
(25) Afanasiev, V. N.; Ustinov, A. N.; Vashurina, I. Y. State of
Hydration Shells of Sodium Chloride in Aqueous Solutions in a Wide
Concentration Range at 273.15−373.15 K. J. Phys. Chem. B 2009, 113
(1), 212−223.
(26) Braendlein, M.; Lonjaret, T.; Leleux, P.; Badier, J.-M.; Malliaras,
G. G. Voltage Amplifier Based on Organic Electrochemical Transistor.
Adv. Science 2017, 4 (1), 1600247.
(27) Bernards, D. A.; Malliaras, G. G. Steady-State and Transient
Behavior of Organic Electrochemical Transistors. Adv. Funct. Mater.
2007, 17 (17), 3538−3544.
(28) Rivnay, J.; Ramuz, M.; Leleux, P.; Hama, A.; Huerta, M.;
Owens, R. M. Organic electrochemical transistors for cell-based
impedance sensing. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 106 (4), 043301.
(29) Ilavsky, J. Nika: software for two-dimensional data reduction. J.
Appl. Crystallogr. 2012, 45 (2), 324−328.
(30) Oosterhout, S. D.; Savikhin, V.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, Y.; Burgers,
M. A.; Marder, S. R.; Bazan, G. C.; Toney, M. F. Mixing Behavior in
Small Molecule:Fullerene Organic Photovoltaics. Chem. Mater. 2017,
29 (7), 3062−3069.
(31) Rodahl, M.; Höök, F.; Krozer, A.; Brzezinski, P.; Kasemo, B.
Quartz crystal microbalance setup for frequency and Q factor
measurements in gaseous and liquid environments. Rev. Sci. Instrum.
1995, 66 (7), 3924−3930.
(32) Höök, F.; Rodahl, M.; Brzezinski, P.; Kasemo, B. Energy
Dissipation Kinetics for Protein and Antibody−Antigen Adsorption
under Shear Oscillation on a Quartz Crystal Microbalance. Langmuir
1998, 14 (4), 729−734.
(33) Marcus, Y. Concentration Dependence of Ionic Hydration
Numbers. J. Phys. Chem. B 2014, 118 (35), 10471−10476.
(34) Bay, L.; Jacobsen, T.; Skaarup, S.; West, K. Mechanism of
Actuation in Conducting Polymers: Osmotic Expansion. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2001, 105 (36), 8492−8497.
(35) Maw, S.; Smela, E.; Yoshida, K.; Stein, R. B. Effects of
monomer and electrolyte concentrations on actuation of PPy(DBS)
bilayers. Synth. Met. 2005, 155 (1), 18−26.
(36) Kawai, T.; Nakazono, M.; Sugimoto, R.-i.; Yoshino, K. Crystal
Structure of Poly(3-alkylthiophene) and Its Doping Effect. J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn. 1992, 61 (9), 3400−3406.
(37) Geise, G. M.; Paul, D. R.; Freeman, B. D. Fundamental water
and salt transport properties of polymeric materials. Prog. Polym. Sci.
2014, 39 (1), 1−42.
(38) Sainbileg, B.; Lan, Y.-B.; Wang, J.-K.; Hayashi, M. Deciphering
Anomalous Raman Features of Regioregular Poly(3-hexylthiophene)
in Ordered Aggregation Form. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122 (8), 4224−
4231.
(39) Francis, C.; Fazzi, D.; Grimm, S. B.; Paulus, F.; Beck, S.;
Hillebrandt, S.; Pucci, A.; Zaumseil, J. Raman spectroscopy and
microscopy of electrochemically and chemically doped high-mobility
semiconducting polymers. J. Mater. Chem. C 2017, 5 (25), 6176−
6184.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
936

(40) Bruckmoser, K.; Resch, K.; Kisslinger, T.; Lucyshyn, T.
Measurement of interdiffusion in polymeric materials by applying
Raman spectroscopy. Polym. Test. 2015, 46, 122−133.
(41) Milani, A.; Brambilla, L.; Del Zoppo, M.; Zerbi, G. Raman
Dispersion and Intermolecular Interactions in Unsubstituted Thio-
phene Oligomers. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111 (6), 1271−1276.
(42) Lin, P.; Yan, F.; Chan, H. L. W. Ion-Sensitive Properties of
Organic Electrochemical Transistors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2010, 2 (6), 1637−1641.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937
937

