Inﬂuence of Side-Chain Chemistry on Structure and Ionic
Conduction Characteristics of Polythiophene Derivatives: A
Computational and Experimental Study
Ban Xuan Dong,†,◆
Christian Nowak,‡,◆Jonathan W. Onorato,§,◆Joseph Strzalka,#
Fernando A. Escobedo,*,‡
Christine K. Luscombe,*,§,∥,⊥
Paul F. Nealey,*,†,∇
and Shrayesh N. Patel*,†,○
†Institute for Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United States
‡School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14953, United States
§Department of Materials Science and Engineering, ∥Department of Chemistry, and ⊥Molecular Engineering and Sciences Institute,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, United States
#X-ray Science Division, ∇Materials Science Division, and ○Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division, Argonne National
Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439, United States
*
S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Although extensive eﬀorts have been devoted
to understanding electronic transport in conjugated polymers,
little is known about their ionic conduction characteristics in
relation to polymer chemistry, processing, and morphology.
This work presents a combined computational and exper-
imental study on morphology and ion transport in thin-ﬁlm
blends of polythiophene derivatives bearing oligoethylene
glycol side-chains and lithium bis(triﬂuoromethanesulfonyl)-
imide (LiTFSI). Using molecular dynamics (MD) simulation,
we show that in the amorphous phase, the polythiophene
derivative P3MEET bearing oligoethylene glycol side-chains
with oxygen directly attached to the thiophene rings possesses
lower Li+ ionic conductivity compared to its analog
P3MEEMT that has a methyl spacer between the oxygen and the thiophene rings. Structural characterization of P3MEET
and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlm upon blending with LiTFSI indicates that adding LiTFSI expands the side-chain domains of the
polymer crystallites and reduces the total degree of crystallinity at the same time. Moreover, LiTFSI is found to inﬁltrate both
the amorphous and crystalline regimes at low concentrations but preferably resides in the amorphous domain at high LiTFSI
concentrations. Ionic transport measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in both P3MEET- and P3MEEMT-
LiTFSI thin ﬁlms is found to occur predominately in the amorphous domain, and ionic conductivity in P3MEEMT-LiTFSI is
always higher than in P3MEET-LiTFSI samples, consistent with predictions from MD simulations. Our work provides a
platform to predict and study the inﬂuence of polymer chemistry on the ionic conductivity of conjugated polymers.
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to their solution processability, mechanical ﬂexibility, and
the fact that facile molecular design/synthesis strategies can be
readily employed to tailor their optical and electronic
properties, conjugated polymers continue to be of interest in
scientiﬁcally and commercially diverse applications.1−6 Tradi-
tionally, the electronic transport functionalities of conjugated
polymers have long played a vital role in the advancement of
organic electronics applications such as xerography,7 organic
light-emitting diodes,8,9 organic thin-ﬁlm transistors,3 and
organic photovoltaics.10,11 More recently, conjugated polymers
have also made their way into many novel electrochemical
applications that require simultaneous electronic and ionic
conducting capability raging from bioelectronics12−15 to
energy applications including batteries,16,17 pseudo capaci-
tors,18 electrochromic windows,19 dye-sensitized solar cells,20
and mechanical actuators.21 In addition to the inherent
advantages over their inorganic counterparts, the “soft” nature
of conjugated polymers and other organic materials enables the
high-quality interface between biological entities and elec-
tronics, rendering them particularly useful for bioelectronics
applications.13,22
The key performance metrics of devices based on mixed
ionic/electronic polymeric conductors such as mechanical,
Received:
December 20, 2018
Revised:
January 31, 2019
Published: February 15, 2019
Article
pubs.acs.org/cm
Cite This: Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
© 2019 American Chemical Society
1418
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
Downloaded via WASHINGTON UNIV on August 22, 2019 at 03:14:45 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

electrical, or biological responses rely on electronic and ionic
transport, which are strongly bound to the morphology of the
polymers. Therefore, designing high-performance mixed
conducting polymers requires an understanding of the
interplay between polymer chemistry, processing, and
morphology on the ionic and electronic conduction character-
istics.23 In contrast to inorganic semiconductors where the
atoms are covalently bonded, the weak intermolecular bonding
between macromolecular chains in conjugated polymers results
in numerous degrees of conformational freedom, giving rise to
their complicated microstructures. The typical structure of
conjugated polymers is semicrystalline, consisting of crystal-
line/aggregate domains embedded in a disordered amorphous
matrix. Past work has shown convincing evidence suggesting
that electronic carriers traverse mainly through the crystalline
domains and only occasionally transport through amorphous
domains via bridging tie-chains.24−28 Ionic transport in
conjugated polymers, however, has been explored only on a
limited basis. Studying ion transport in the conjugated polymer
has remained a challenging task due to the dominance of
electronic transport over ionic transport which renders most of
the common techniques used to measure ion transport
ineﬀective. Additionally, most of the ion transport studies on
conjugated polymers have been performed on poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(styrene sulfonate)
(PEDOT:PSS) which has a rather complicated structure,
preventing its use as a model system for structure−function
relationship studies.29−31 Despite recent work focusing on
developing “non-PEDOT” conjugated polymers have polar
side-chains and ion-conducting functionality,32−34 detailed
investigations on the inﬂuence of polymer chemistry on ion
uptake, polymer morphology, and ionic transport are still
lacking.
To this end, in this work, we report a systematic
investigation on the inﬂuence of ion uptake on structure and
ion-conducting behavior of two polythiophene derivatives
bearing diﬀerent oligoethylene glycol side-chains. Using
molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, we show that
P3MEET, a polythiophene derivative bearing oligoethylene
glycol side-chains with an oxygen bonded directly to the
thiophene rings, has lower segmental mobility compared to its
analog P3MEEMT that have a methyl spacer between the
oxygen and thiophene rings. Consequently, the Li+ ions
conductivity in the amorphous P3MEEMT is predicted to be
approximately a factor of 5 higher than in the amorphous
P3MEET. Structural characterization of P3MEET and
P3MEEMT thin ﬁlm upon blending with lithium bis-
(triﬂuoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) indicates that LiTF-
SI inﬁltrates into both crystalline and amorphous domains at
low LiTFSI concentration but preferably resides in the
amorphous domain at high LiTFSI concentration. The ionic
conductivity is determined experimentally using electro-
chemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) due to the relatively
high ionic conductivity over the electronic conductivity of both
polymers. Using a combination of simulation and experiment
results, we infer that ionic transport in both P3MEET and
P3MEEMT occurs in the amorphous domain. Moreover, in
excellent agreement with our MD simulation prediction, the
experimental ionic conductivity in P3MEEMT is always higher
than in P3MEET at all temperatures and concentrations
studied. Our results highlight the importance of side-chain
chemistry in dictating ionic transport of conjugated polymers.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
II.I. Materials and Sample Preparation. P3MEET and
P3MEEMT were synthesized by ﬁrst synthesizing the monomers
2,5-dibromo-3-(methoxyethoxyethoxy) thiophene [3MEET] and 2,5-
dibromo-3-(methoxyethoxyethoxymethyl) thiophene [3MEEMT],
then polymerizing using the Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization
(KCTP). Additional synthetic details are provided in the Supporting
Information and the Results and Discussion section.
All substrates used in this study were cleaned by ultrasonication in
acetone and 2-propanol for 15 min in each solvent, followed by
ozone-plasma treatment for 3 min. Grazing incidence wide-angle X-
ray scattering (GIWAXS) and spectroscopic ellipsometry measure-
ments were performed on ﬁlms deposited on Si substrates with 1.5
nm of native SiO2. UV−vis absorption measurements were performed
on ﬁlms deposited on glass substrates. Conductivity measurements
were performed on ﬁlms deposited atop custom-fabricated
interdigitated gold electrodes on Si substrates supported by 1000
nm thick SiO2.
Solutions of P3MEET and P3MEEMT were prepared by dissolving
the materials in anhydrous chloroform and anhydrous acetonitrile,
respectively, at a concentration of 10 mg/mL and stirred overnight
before being ﬁltered through a 0.45 μm ﬁlter. Bis(triﬂuoromethane)-
sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) (Sigma-Aldrich, battery grade) was
dissolved in an anhydrous acetonitrile, also with a concentration of 10
mg/mL. P3MEET, P3MEEMT, and LiTFSI solutions were then
mixed at the appropriate ratios to achieve diﬀerent LiTFSI blending
concentrations: r = [Li+]/[EO] = 0 (neat sample), 0.01, 0.05, 0.10,
and 0.15. The mixed solutions were then stirred for several hours
before being spin-coated under an argon atmosphere onto the
prepared substrates at 2000 rpm for 2 min. Film thicknesses of all
samples in this study were kept at ca. 50 nm, as conﬁrmed by
spectroscopic ellipsometry measurement.
II.II. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS). Electro-
chemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were
performed on a sample fabricated on top of interdigitated gold
electrode devices (IDE) using a Gamry 600+ Potentiostat inside an
argon-ﬁlled glovebox. A schematic representation of the IDE is
exempliﬁed in Figure 7a. Prior to conductivity measurements, the
excess amount of materials on the electrode pads was scraped away.
The electrical connection from the IDE to the Potentiostat was made
using using two custom-built microprobes (Semiprobe Inc.). The EIS
characterization was performed from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz with an
oscillatory peak potential of 100 mV. The collected impedance data
were then ﬁt to the appropriate equivalent circuits to extract the
sample ionic resistance, Rion, and electronic resistance, Re, from which
the ionic conductivity can be calculated. More details of selecting
equivalent circuits and conductivity calculations are presented in the
Results and Discussion section.
II.III. Grazing Incidence Wide-Angle X-ray Scattering
(GIWAXS). GIWAXS measurements were performed at beamline 8-
ID-E of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory
with 10.86 keV (λ = 0.1142 nm) synchrotron radiation. Samples were
enclosed and measured inside a low vacuum chamber (10−3 mbar) to
minimize concerns about radiation damage as well as to prevent
extraneous scattering from ambient air. The measurement time was
chosen to be 10 s per frame. For each sample, three datasets were
taken from three adjacent spots on the sample and then summed to
enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. In our work, the samples were tilted
at an angle of incidence of 0.14° with respect to the incoming beam.
This angle was chosen to be above the estimated critical angle of the
sample (ca. 0.13°) but below the critical angle of the Si substrates (ca.
0.17°). The scattering signal was recorded with a Pilatus 1MF pixel
array detector (pixel size = 172 μm) positioned 228 mm from the
sample. Each dataset was stored as a 981 × 1043 32-bit tiﬀimage with
20-bit dynamic range. The Pilatus detector has rows of inactive pixels
at the border between detector modules. To ﬁll these gaps, after each
measurement, the detector was moved to a new vertical direction and
the measurement on each spot was repeated, then the gaps were ﬁlled
by combining the data from two detector positions.
We also
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1419

performed detector nonuniformity, detection eﬃciency, the polar-
ization eﬀect, and solid-angle variation for each image. Vertical line-
cuts were performed as a function of intensity along the qz direction.
All of the GIWAXS data processing and extraction were executed
using the GIXSGUI package for MATLAB.35
To construct the pole ﬁgure of the (100) reﬂection in each sample,
wedge cuts with an angular breadth of 1° were extracted from
GIWAXS images, performed using the GIXSGUI. Each wedge cut was
ﬁrst ﬁt to an empirical baseline function to enable the background
intensity and amorphous scattering to be subtracted. The background-
subtracted wedge cut was then ﬁt to a Voigt function to extract the
integrated intensity as well as the position of the reﬂection of interest,
q100. The integrated intensity of each peak was reported as a function
of the polar angle χ between the scattering vector and pole vector
(substrate normal). Additional details of the complete pole ﬁgure
construction can be found elsewhere.36
II.IV. UV−Vis Absorption Spectroscopy. The UV−vis absorp-
tion spectroscopy measurements were performed using a Shimadzu
UV-3600 Plus UV−vis−NIR Dual Beam Spectrophotometer at the
Soft Matter Characterization Facility (SMCF) at the University of
Chicago.
II.V. Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC). Size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) was performed using a Malvern Viscotek
TDA 305 with a coupled UV-Detector, with a detector temperature of
30 °C. Chloroform with a 1.0 mL/min ﬂow rate was used as an
eluent, with a sample concentration of 1 mg/mL. The molecular
weight of the polymers was measured relative to polystyrene
standards.
II.VI. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. NMR
spectroscopy was performed using a Bruker AV 300 instrument for
small molecule studies and a Bruker AV 500 for polymer studies. All
experiments were performed at 25 °C in CDCl3.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
III.I. Computational Simulation. In the ﬁrst phase of our
investigation, we employ molecular dynamics (MD) simu-
lations to search for relevant chemistries to guide comple-
mentary synthesis and characterization eﬀorts. We chose to use
polythiophene derivatives due to the vast literature available on
their structure and charge transport models.27,37−41 Addition-
ally, the morphological structure of polythiophene can be
investigated with common techniques such as X-ray scattering
or optical methods.37,42,43 To introduce ion-conducting
functionality into polythiophene, we attach polar oligoethylene
glycol side-chains to the polythiophene backbone. The
originally proposed chemistry, P3MEET (left side of Figure
1a), consists of a thiophene backbone and an oligoethylene
glycol side-chain with an oxygen atom directly bonded to the
thiophene ring. Although placing the electron donating oxygen
atom right next to the thiophene core is known to reduce the
ionization energy and improve electrochemical stability of the
polymer,32,33,44 it could negatively impact the ionic con-
ductivity due to the reduced segmental motion of the oxygen
atom covalently bonded to the rigid polythiophene backbone.
Thus, to improve ion transport, a second chemistry,
P3MEEMT (right side of Figure 1a), is proposed.
P3MEEMT is chemically very similar to P3MEET but
possesses a methylene spacer between the backbone and the
ﬁrst oxygen atom of the oligoethylene glycol chain.
Due to the semicrystalline nature of conjugated polymers,
we use MD simulations to predict ionic conductivity in the two
limiting scenarios of purely crystalline and amorphous systems.
To simulate the systems of interest, a hybrid all-atom (AA)/
united-atom (UA) model is used where the ring is simulated
with the all-atom optimized potentials for liquid simulations
(OPLS-AA) forceﬁeld, whereas the side-chains are modeled
using the OPLS-UA forceﬁeld, as shown in Figure 1a. The AA
model is used for the thiophene rings as it is better suited to
capture the ring−ring stacking. The side-chains are modeled
with the UA model for computational eﬃciency. Parameters
for the model are given in the Supporting Information (SI).
Diﬀerent methods were used to obtain equilibrated
structures of the phases of interest. For the crystalline phase,
the initial conﬁguration was equivalent to the crystalline
structure of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) (Isomorph I)45
Figure 1. (a) Chemical structures of P3MEET and P3MEEMT. (b, c) Snapshots of equilibrated crystalline and amorphous systems used in this
study. (d) Long-time plateau mean square displacement (MSD) of 3 oxygen atoms in the side-chains of P3MEET and P3MEEMT. The oxygen # is
noted in (a). (e) A typical plot of the MSD of a mobile Li+ ion within P3MEEMT crystalline system and the ﬁt used to calculate ion mobility.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1420

except that the crystals of both P3MEET and P3MEEMT were
expanded to accommodate the longer side-chains. The system
was thermalized at 300 K and 1 atm (using the Nosé−Hoover
barostat46) until metrics such as Enon‑bonded, Ebonded, and the
pressure tensor components become time-independent. For
amorphous conﬁgurations, a CG model,47 which represents the
ring as one bead and the hexyl side-chain as two beads, was
adapted to model poly-(3-nonyl-thiophene) (P3NT) by
adding another bead to the side. Once the CG systems were
equilibrated, an in-house reverse coarse graining code was used
to generate a conﬁguration of the UA/AA model. This
conﬁguration was then allowed to also equilibrate at 300 K and
1 atm. Snapshots of the equilibrated crystalline and amorphous
morphology of P3MEEMT are given in Figure 1b,c. Crystalline
and amorphous structures of P3MEET appear similar and are
thus not shown.
Former studies on the ionic conductivity in polymer
electrolytes have correlated higher chain segment mobility
with greater ionic conductivity.48,49 Thus, after equilibrating
the crystalline and amorphous structures, we investigated the
segmental mobility of P3MEET and P3MEEMT side-chains by
calculating the mean square displacement (MSD) of the three
oxygen atoms in their side-chains, as depicted in Figure 1a. We
expectedly found that the MSD of each atom increases and
then plateaus beyond a certain time period since the side-chain
is covalently bound to the rigid polythiophene backbone (see
the Supporting Information Figures S8−S11). Figure 1d shows
the plateau MSD of the three oxygens in ion-free P3MEET and
P3MEEMT crystalline systems. For both polymers, the MSD
of the oxygen atom expectedly increases with greater distance
(from the anchoring thiophene backbone) along the oligo-
ethylene side-chain. Moreover, adding the carbon spacer in
P3MEEMT increases the MSD and hence the segmental
mobility of oxygen atoms at corresponding positions relative to
P3MEET for both crystalline and amorphous systems.
To calculate the ionic conductivity, free Li+ ions were added
to the systems at a concentration r = [Li+]/[EO] = 0.02, and
their mobility tracked upon the application of a large electric
ﬁeld of 500 MV/m. The choice of r is such that ions are
suﬃciently diluted to minimize ion−ion interactions but also
abundant enough to allow for good statistical sampling. Free
Li+ ions are used instead of entire salts to avoid the need to
simulate the very long-time-scale associated with salt
dissociation. This implicitly assumes a 100% dissociation
ratio which is a sensible assumption for LiTFSI in PEO-like
environments. The electric ﬁeld value chosen is large enough
to allow for good sampling of the ionic motion (given the
accessible simulation time-scale), but still suﬃciently moderate
to yield a linear response behavior (Ohm’s law). When
applying such a large electric ﬁeld, a tethering potential was
used to keep the thiophene backbones near their original
positions and avoid destroying the overall microstructure.
Simulations were run for 30 ns in a constant volume ensemble
with a set temperature of 400 K to allow for better sampling.
For calculating the ionic conductivity ⟨μ⟩, three replicate
simulations were run, and only “mobile” ions are considered,
i.e., those showing a parabolic dependence of MSD on time as
in the example plotted in Figure 1e. For such ions, the MSD
dependence is ﬁtted to the following equation from which the
ionic mobility ⟨μ⟩can be extracted
vt
E
t
MSD
( )
(
)
2
2 2
μ
≈
=
(1)
Where v, t, and E are drift velocity, time, and electric ﬁeld
strength, respectively. The ionic conductivity, σ̂, is then
calculated as
Nmobile
σ
μ
̂ = ⟨⟩⟨
⟩
(2)
where ⟨Nmobile⟩is the average number of the “mobile” ions.
More details of these conductivity calculations can be found in
the Supporting Information. We then normalize the con-
ductivity by the conductivity of amorphous P3MEET. The
average mobility, fraction of mobile ions, and normalized ionic
conductivities of P3MEET and P3MEEMT in both crystalline
and amorphous systems are summarized in Table 1.
Interestingly, although in the amorphous phase, the normalized
conductivity is ca. 5 times higher in P3MEEMT than in
P3MEET, the trend reverses in the crystal phase; i.e., the
normalized conductivity is ca. 5 times higher in P3MEET than
in P3MEEMT. To explain this behavior, we show in Figure
2 snapshots of P3MEEMT and P3MEET side-chain
conformations in the presence of Li+ ions within the crystalline
domain. In pure PEO, two chains can form a “cage” around the
ion, forming a deep kinetic trap for the ions.50 A condition of
cage formation is that the ion is only coordinated by two side-
chains, otherwise there are more chains coordinating the ion.
To quantify cage formation, we determine the number of side-
chains which have an atom within a 3.5 Å cutoﬀof each ion
and ﬁnd the average number of atoms which are coordinating
the ion. We ﬁnd that these values for P3MEET and
P3MEEMT to be 2.47 ± 0.03 and 2.14 ± 0.003, respectively.
This agrees with the idea that cage formation is higher in
crystalline P3MEEMT, where the regular arrangement of side-
chains and mobility of the oxygen near the backbone allow for
cage formation. In contrast, in P3MEET, the lack of mobility
for the oxygen near the thiophene backbone reduces the
Table 1. Calculated Ion Mobility, Fraction of Mobile Ion, and Normalized Ionic Conductivity of P3MEG and P3MEET in
Equilibrated Crystalline and Amorphous Systems from MD Simulations
crystaline P3MEET
crystaline P3MEEMT
amorphous P3MEET
amorphous P3MEEMT
mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
4.52 × 10−6
4.00 × 10−6
1.82 × 10−6
2.25 × 10−6
Nmobile/Ntotal
0.133
0.031
0.025
0.1
relative conductivity
13.33
2.78
1
5
Figure 2. Snapshot showing the ion caging that is frequently seen in
crystalline P3MEEMT but almost never in crystalline P3MEET.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1421

chance of cage formation. In the amorphous systems, ion-
trapping cages are more diﬃcult to form because of the
irregular arrangement of the side-chains. Although our
simulation results only predict Li+ ion transport behavior, we
expect similar trends with the TFSI−anion since transport of
both ions relies on the segmental motion of PEO side-chains.
Overall, our simulation results indicate the strong inﬂuence of
side-chain chemistry on ionic transport characteristics of
semicrystalline conjugated polymers.
III.II. Synthesis. Motivated by insights learned from
computational simulation, we begin to synthesize two
polythiophene derivatives, P3MEEMT and P3MEET, follow-
ing the synthesis pathways described in Figure 3a. Following
the successful synthesis of both monomers, P3MEET and
P3MEEMT are synthesized using the Kumada catalyst transfer
polymerization (KCTP), as detailed in Figure 3a and in the
Supporting Information. Regioregularity of the P3MEET and
P3MEEMT samples was determined to be approximately 95
and 94% by comparing the signals of head−tail and head−head
signal in 1H NMR spectra (see the Supporting Information
Figure S1 for details). The number average molecular weight
(Mn) of the polymers was determined through size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) (see the Supporting Information
Figure S2); the measured Mn was 12 kg/mol for P3MEET
and 15 kg/mol for P3MEEMT. The similarity between these
two polymers implies that any diﬀerence between the two
samples will be due to diﬀerences in chemical structures, rather
than the molecular weight or dispersity.
To fabricate thin ﬁlms of P3MEET and P3MEEMT, we
dissolve the polymers in chloroform and acetonitrile,
respectively, which are not only good solvents for the polymers
but also miscible with LiTFSI solution, allowing for the
formation of homogeneous spin-casting solutions. Addition-
ally, chloroform and acetonitrile have very similar boiling
points, permitting reasonable comparison between P3MEET
and P3MEEMT structure, as the boiling point and vapor
pressure of casting solvents have strong eﬀects on the ﬁnal
polymer morphology.51 Figure 3b depicts the optical images as
well as the absorption spectra of P3MEET and P3MEEMT in
solution and thin-ﬁlm states. Both P3MEET and P3MEEMT
exhibit pronounced red-shifts going from solution to solid
states, suggesting the aggregation and planarization of their
conjugated backbone after spin-casting. Notably, the optical
properties of P3MEET are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
P3MEEMT despite only a small diﬀerence in the side-chain
chemistry. In the case of P3MEET, placing the oxygen atom
right next to the polythiophene backbone results in a marked
red-shift in absorption spectra compared to P3MEEMT. This
is due to the electron donating ability of the conjugated oxygen
atom to the thiophene core that shifts the ionization energy
and lowers the band-gap of P3MEET, similar to previous
observations in the literature.32,44
III.III. Inﬂuence of LiTFSI Doping on Semicrystalline
Morphology of P3MEET and P3MEEMT. To study ionic
transport in P3MEEMT and P3MEET, we introduce the ionic
dopant LiTFSI by spin-casting the blended solutions of
P3MEET-LiTFSI and P3MEEMT-LiTFSI onto the desired
substrates. AFM images (see the Supporting Information
Figure S5) and X-ray diﬀraction patterns (as will be discussed
below) indicated no signal of LiTFSI aggregation, suggesting
that LiTFSI is well mixed within the polymer matrix. To study
the inﬂuence of ion addition on the morphological structure of
Figure 3. (a) Synthesis scheme and (b) optical images and normalized UV−vis absorption spectra of P3MEET and P3MEEMT both in solution
and thin-ﬁlm states.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1422

P3MEET and P3MEEMT, we employ grazing incidence wide-
angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) to investigate the solid-state
structure of P3MEET and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms as a function
of LiTFSI blending concentration r = [Li+]/[EO]. The
GIWAXS patterns of P3MEET-LiTFSI thin ﬁlms are shown
in the top row of Figure 4. For the neat P3MEET sample (r =
0), we observe both the side-chain stacking peak (100) and
π−π stacking peak (010) predominantly in the out-of-plane
direction, indicating that P3MEET exhibits a mixed orientation
of both “face-on” and “edge-on” orientation of polymer
crystallites. Upon introducing LiTFSI, the structure of
P3MEET progressively changes. Speciﬁcally, we observe the
sharpening of the (100) peak together with the appearance of
the (200) and (300) peaks for r equal to or large than 0.05,
suggesting that P3MEET crystallites become more oriented by
the addition of LiTFSI. Additionally, at very high LiTFSI
concentration r = 0.10 and 0.15, the side-chain diﬀraction
peaks (h00) are observed in the out-of-plane direction,
whereas the (010) is observed mainly in the in-plane direction,
indicating that the polymer crystallites mostly adopting the
edge-on orientation at these concentrations. Finally, the
intensity of the π−π stacking peak (010) also signiﬁcantly
reduces which is indicative of the disruption of interchain π−π
stacking upon introducing LiTFSI.
The GIWAXS patterns of P3MEEMT-LiTFSI samples are
shown in the bottom row of Figure 4. Despite some certain
diﬀerences, P3MEEMT shows similar transitions to P3MEET
upon introducing LiTFSI. In the diﬀraction pattern of the neat
P3MEEMT ﬁlm, the (100) side-chain diﬀraction peak is
predominantly in the in-plane direction, whereas the (010) π-
stacking diﬀraction peak is predominantly in the out-of-plane
direction, suggesting the bias toward face-on orientation of
P3MEEMT. Upon introducing LiTFSI, the (100) peak shape
of P3MEEMT becomes sharper together with the appearance
of the (200) and (300) peaks, indicating the improvement in
the molecular order of P3MEEMT which is similar to
P3MEET. One noticeable diﬀerence with P3MEET is that
the diﬀracting intensity of the (010) peak still remain relatively
high even at the highest LiTFSI concentration r = 0.15. This
observation suggests that the crystallite structure of
P3MEEMT is more resilient to the addition of ions.
To quantify the inﬂuence of LiTFSI on the molecular
orientation as well as the relative degree of crystallinity (rDoC)
of P3MEET and P3MEEMT, we construct partial pole ﬁgure
of (100) reﬂection as a function of the polar angle χ between
the scattering vector, q100, and the substrate normal.36,37,52 The
integrated intensity at each polar angle was further scaled by
the geometrical factor sin(χ) to correctly quantify the
population of crystallites at a particular orientation.53 In our
experiment, data for χ < 2° is not available since the reciprocal
lattice vector does not intersect with the Ewald sphere in this
regime, whereas data for χ > 83° is impacted by standing waves
and excluded from our analysis.42,52 Shown in Figure 5a,b are
the geometrically corrected partial pole ﬁgures of (100)
reﬂection in P3MEET and P3MEEMT, respectively. The pole
ﬁgure of P3MEET neat sample r = 0 shows peak intensity near
χ = 30° and the peak shifts to lower value of χ with increasing
r, indicating that P3MEET crystallites transition from face-on-
dominated to edge-on-dominated orientation upon introduc-
ing LiTFSI. Similarly, the pole ﬁgures of P3MEEMT samples
show a peak near χ = 90° for r = 0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.10 but the
peak shifts to χ ∼0° for r = 0.15 sample, suggesting that the
crystallites of P3MEEMT also shift to edge-on orientation at
high LiTFSI concentration. These outcomes agree with visual
inspection using raw detector images in Figure 4.
Following previously described procedures,52,53 the rDoC of
each sample is calculated by integrating the partial pole ﬁgures
and then normalized by the volume fraction of polymer in
polymer−LiTFSI mixtures. To facilitate accurate rDoC
comparison, all samples were made at approximately the
same thickness (ca. 50 nm). In addition, X-ray beam footprint
and exposure time were kept the same for all samples. For each
polymer, we further normalize the rDoC by the rDoC of the
neat sample (r = 0) to emphasize the eﬀect of LiTFSI addition
on rDoC. Shown in Figure 5c is the normalized rDoC of
P3MEET and P3MEEMT as a function of LiTFSI
concentration r. For P3MEET, the rDoC is found to quickly
diminish by the addition of LiTFSI (note the log scale of y
Figure 4. GIWAXS patterns of P3MEET (top row) and P3MEEMT (bottom row) at diﬀerent LiTFSI blending concentration r = [Li+]/[EO].
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1423

axis). Interestingly, the rDoC of P3MEEMT is found to
initially increase, r = 0.01, before starting to decrease with
further increasing LiTFSI concentration. This behavior is in
fact similar to recent work by Guardado and Salleo where they
reported a slight increase and then decrease in rDoC of P3HT
upon injecting TFSI−ions.54 Here, it is worth noting that for
the same LiTFSI concentration, the estimated rDoC of
P3MEEMT sample is always higher than P3MEET. For
example, at the highest LiTFSI concentration, r = 0.15, the
rDoC of P3MEET is ca. 7% compared to the pristine sample,
whereas rDoC of P3MEEMT is ca. 20%. In other words,
adding LiTFSI into P3MEET has a stronger impact on the
polymer crystallinity as compared to P3MEEMT.
To further study the inﬂuence of LiTFSI addition on the
polymer structure, we calculate the side-chain distance l = 2π/
q100 and the corresponding lattice strain = (l −l0)/l0 × 100%,
the results of which are plotted in Figure 5e,f. In this equation,
l0 is the side-chain distance in the neat r = 0 sample. For both
polymers, the side-chain distance and lattice strain do not
linearly scale with LiTFSI concentration/volume fraction. For
P3MEET, the side-chain distance increases initially from 1.48
to 2.03 nm but plateaus for salt concentration r higher than
0.05. The side-chain distance of neat P3MEEMT is 1.87 nm
which is larger than P3MEET, as expected. Upon introducing
LiTFSI, P3MEEMT side-chain distance increases and saturates
at 2.07 nm for r higher than 0.01. A similar trend is observed
for (100) lattice strain in Figure 5f, where the strain in the side-
chain direction is found to saturate around ∼10 and ∼35% in
P3MEEMT and P3MEET, respectively. Here, it is important
to note that the strain induced by ion uptake in both
P3MEEMT and P3MEET is much larger than polythiophene
derivatives bearing aliphatic side-chains, which only strain by a
maximum amount of ca. 10% upon introducing ions via
electrochemical doping, a more intensely driven process than
chemical mixing.54−56 The high level of ion uptake along the
side-chain directions of P3MEET and P3MEEMT crystallites
could be attributed to the high polarity of their PEO side-
chains and the relative openness of the EG side-chain
structure. Additionally, the higher lattice strain of P3MEET
indicates that P3MEET crystals uptake more ions than
P3MEEMT. This outcome is further supported by our
previous observation of raw GIWAXS patterns and rDoC
where P3MEEMT crystalline structure appears to be more
“resilient” to the addition of LiTFSI than is P3MEET.
Figure 5. (a, b) Partial pole ﬁgures of (100) reﬂection in P3MEET and P3MEEMT samples at diﬀerent LiTFSI concentrations. The shaded areas
in ﬁgure (a) and (b) denote the nonmeasurable regime of our experiments. (c) The calculated relative degree of crystallinity (rDoC) of P3MEET
and P3MEEMT as a function of LiTFSI concentration. (e) Side-chain stacking distances and (f) calculated lattice strain of P3MEET and
P3MEEMT as a function of LiTFSI concentration and volume fraction. (g) Schematic representation of LiTFSI distribution within P3MEET/
P3MEEMT semicrystalline structure. LiTFSI inﬁltrates both crystalline and amorphous domains at a low concentration but preferably resides in
the amorphous domain at a high concentration.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1424

The inﬂuence of LiTFSI uptake on rDoC and lattice strain
has a signiﬁcant implication on the distribution of LiTFSI
within the semicrystalline morphology of both polymers. Since
GIWAXS is only sensitive to crystalline domains, any changes
in the structure of the amorphous regimes caused by the
presence of LiTFSI are not detected by GIWAXS. At low
LiTFSI concentration, because the crystalline lattice strain
increases with r, we postulate that LiTFSI inﬁltrates both the
crystalline and amorphous domains. However, at high salt
concentration, we see saturation of the lattice strain and
likewise the amount of LiTFSI in the crystalline domain in
addition to the reduction in the overall rDoC of both
polymers. We thus conclude that in the high concentration
regimes, crystallites are “ﬁlled” with ions, and the majority of
additional LiTFSI preferably resides in the lower density
amorphous regime. As a result, GIWAXS data do not show an
increase in side-chain distance. A proposed
distribution of
LiTFSI within the semicrystalline domains of P3MEET/
P3MEEMT is illustrated in Figure 5g.
Since electronic charge transport depends heavily on the
ability of the carrier to hop along the π-stacking direction, it is
important to study the inﬂuence of LiTFSI addition to the π−π
interaction between polymer chains. Shown in Figure 6a,b are
the horizontal line-cuts of P3MEET and vertical line-cuts of
P3MEEMT at diﬀerent LiTFSI concentrations. We study the
π−π interaction using the horizontal line-cuts for P3MEET but
vertical line-cuts for P3MEEMT since P3MEET crystallite
adopts mostly edge-on orientation but P3MEEMT crystallite
Figure 6. (a) Horizontal line-cuts from GIWAXS patterns of P3MEET. (b) Vertical line-cuts from GIWAXS patterns of P3MEEMT at diﬀerent
LiTFSI concentrations. The intensity of the line-cuts was shifted for clarity.
Figure 7. (a) Design of IDE devices used for our EIS measurement. (b) Exemplary Nyquist plots of P3MEET-LiTFSI and P3MEEMT-LiTFSI
samples at r = 0.10. The inset of each ﬁgure shows the simpliﬁed equivalent circuits used to ﬁt the impedance data. (c, d) LiTFSI concentration and
temperature dependence ionic conductivities of P3MEET and P3MEEMT samples. (e) Comparison of P3MEET and P3MEEMT ionic
conductivity at 90 °C.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1425

adopts mostly face-on orientation at all LiTFSI concentrations.
As shown in Figure 6a, the horizontal line-cut of P3MEET
shows a strong π−π stacking peak (010) near q = 1.60 Å−1,
which corresponds to a π−π stacking distance of ca. 0.39 nm.
Upon adding LiTFSI, we observe the appearance of two extra
diﬀraction peaks, denoted A and B, as indicated by the dashed
arrows in Figure 6a. Since the position of peak A doubles the
position of B (qA ∼2 × qB), it is likely that peak A is a higher
order peak of peak B. We hypothesize that a small amount of
LiTFSI ions within the crystalline domain can intercalate
between the π-stacks, increase the π-stacking distance from
0.39 nm to ca. 0.88 nm. In stark contrast, the π-stacking
distance of P3MEEMT only mildly increases from ca. 0.38 to
0.39 nm from r = 0 to 0.15, suggesting that the crystallite
structure of P3MEEMT is less sensitive to the addition of
LiTFSI compared to P3MEET, consistent with the smaller
uptake amount of LiTFSI in the side-chain direction presented
above. The slight broadening and shifting of the P3MEEMT π-
stacking peak at high salt concentrations most likely originates
from the presence of LiTFSI in the side-chain and/or in the
surrounding amorphous domain. The lack of the signature of
the intercalation of Li+ ions into the π-stacks of P3MEEMT
could be due to the farther distance from the nearest oxygen
atom to the thiophene backbone. Thus, Li+ ions coordinating
with oxygen have a lower probability of intercalating and
disrupting the π-stacking eﬃciency in P3MEEMT. This ﬁnding
again shows the strong inﬂuence of side-chain chemistry on the
morphological structure and the ion uptake ability of
conjugated polymers.
III.IV. Ion Transport in LiTFSI-Blended P3MEET and
P3MEEMT Thin Films. To preface our discussion on ion
transport of P3MEET and P3MEEMT, we would like to note
that up to date, measuring ion transport in conjugated
polymers has remained a challenging task. This is due to the
dominance of electronic transport over ionic transport, which
obstructs the use of the common ionic conductivity measure-
ment techniques such as electrochemical impedance spectros-
copy (EIS). Most ionic transport studies were performed using
the moving-front experiment developed by Malliaras,31 which
only works on electrochromic polymers such as PEDOT:PSS.
Here, by using high ionic conductivity polymers, carefully
purifying our polymers to reduce the amount of unwanted
electronic carrier doping and performing the experiment in
oxygen and water-free environment, we are able to measure
ionic conductivity of both P3MEET and P3MEEMT using
EIS. We perform EIS measurements on ca. 50 nm P3MEET-
LiTFSI and P3MEEMT-LiTFSI thin-ﬁlm samples fabricated
on top of interdigitated electrode devices (IDEs) whose design
is shown in Figure 7a. IDEs were employed to increase the
eﬀective surface area and enhance the signal-to-noise ratio in
thin-ﬁlm conductivity measurement.57−60 Shown in Figure 7b
are exemplary Nyquist plots of both P3MEET-LiTFSI and
P3MEEMT-LiTFSI samples at LiTFSI concentration r = 0.10
at two diﬀerent temperatures. The Nyquist plots of P3MEET-
LiTFSI samples consist of two semicircles without the
capacitive tails and low frequency, indicating the presence of
both ion and electron conducting behavior.5,6 The simpliﬁed
equivalent circuit used to ﬁt the EIS data is shown in the inset
of the ﬁgure. Since gold is a blocking electrode for ions, the
ionic conduction is represented by a constant phase element
CPEdl in series with an ion resistance Rion. Additionally,
because ionic and electronic carriers are expected to transport
simultaneously within the sample, the equivalent circuit also
consists of an electronic resistance Re in parallel to the ionic
resistance. With increasing temperature, the radii of both
semicircles reduce due to the enhance in both ionic and
electronic conductivities, as expected. Fitting the EIS data
using this equivalent circuit demonstrates an excellent
agreement to the raw data, suggesting that our model
accurately represents ion and electron transport within the
sample. The Nyquist plots of P3MEEMT-LiTFSI sample, on
the other hand, consist of a semicircle whose radius also
reduces with increasing temperature and a capacitive tail at low
frequency. This behavior is widely observed in polymer
electrolyte-LiTFSI blends,5,61 which is indicative of the
domination of ionic transport in P3MEEMT-LiTFSI sample.
The equivalent circuit used to ﬁt P3MEEMT-LiTFSI
impedance data thus does not include the electronic resistance
Re and also shows strong agreement to the raw EIS data.
Here, it is interesting to note the diﬀerences in EIS data of
P3MEET and P3MEEMT. The impedance data indicates that
P3MEET processes some “intrinsic” electronic carrier
conductivity, whereas P3MEEMT does not. This behavior is
observed over several polymer batches that we made. Usually,
the “intrinsic” electronic conductivity of conjugated polymers
originates from chemical defects such as a fraction of oxidized
segments along the polymer backbone, unexpected chemical
species associated with the chain ends or leftover catalysts
during the synthesis. In our work, P3MEET and P3MEEMT
were synthesized, puriﬁed, and handled in an almost identical
way, thus we do not expect signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the
amount of defects/impurities presented in the materials. The
diﬀerences between P3MEET and P3MEEMT, therefore, most
likely originate from the diﬀerence in the chemistries of the
two polymers. In P3MEET, the oxygen directly attached to the
thiophene core can stabilize the electronic carriers (i.e., holes),
which give rise to its electronic conducting states.22 Therefore,
P3MEET-LiTFSI samples possessed dual conduction charac-
teristics, whereas P3MEEMT-LiTFSI samples only showed
ion-dominated transport behavior.
By ﬁtting the EIS data to the equivalent circuit, we extract
the ionic resistance Rion and calculate ionic conductivity
according to the following equation57
R
d
l N
h
1
(
1)
ion
σ =
−
(3)
In eq 3, d = 8 μm is the separation distance between electrode
teeth, l = 3000 μm is the tooth length, N = 480 is the number
of electrodes, and h is the total thickness of the sample. The
extracted ionic conductivity as a function of temperature and
LiTFSI concentrations of P3MEET and P3MEEMT is shown
in Figure 7c,d, respectively. The ionic conductivity of both
polymers rapidly increases at low LiTFSI concentration, from r
= 0.01 to 0.05, but decreases from concentration r = 0.05−
0.15. This behavior is expected and aligns with the current ion
transport theories for polymer electrolytes. The increase in
ionic conductivity at low concentration is due to the increase
in the ionic carrier concentration, whereas the decrease of the
conductivity at higher salt concentration originates from (i)
the reduction in the dissociation rate of LiTFSI and (ii)
increasing the eﬀective glass transition temperature of the
materials due to transient cross-linking between Li+ ion and
oxygen molecules of PEO side-chains. This eﬀect is particularly
more pronounced at low temperature where the temperature
approaches the glass transition temperature, as illustrated in
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1426

both the ionic conductivity data of P3MEET and P3MEEMT.
To emphasize the eﬀect of side-chain chemistry on ionic
transport, we plot in Figure 7e the representative concentration
dependence ionic conductivity of both polymers at 90 °C. At
all LiTFSI concentrations and temperatures studied, the ionic
conductivity is always higher in P3MEEMT compared to
P3MEET. Our ﬁnding highlights the signiﬁcant role of side-
chain chemistry on ionic transport of polymer electrolytes.
An important question to be addressed is whether ionic
transport in conjugated polymers occurs in the crystalline or
amorphous regions of the polymer. We postulate that in our
samples, ionic transport happens mainly in the amorphous
regimes based on several key observations. First, our
simulation results indicated that in P3MEEMT ion transport
is better than P3MEET in the amorphous region but poorer in
the crystalline region (see Table 1). Since the ionic
conductivity is higher in P3MEEMT at all conditions studied,
it is highly likely that the majority of ion transport occurs in the
amorphous regime. Moreover, our DSC results clearly
indicated several crystallite melting transitions in P3MEEMT
(see the Supporting Information Figure S3), yet no obvious
transition was observed in the ionic conductivity data. This
suggests that most of the contribution of ionic conductivity
came from the highly disordered amorphous regime. Finally,
our GIWAXS data shows that at high LiTFSI concentration,
the amount of LiTFSI within the crystalline regimes stays
almost the same for both P3MEET and P3MEEMT, yet the
ionic conductivity for both polymers followed the trend one
would expect for concentration dependence behavior. This
further corroborates our conclusion that in our P3MEET and
P3MEEMT samples, ions mainly traverse through the
amorphous domain. Interestingly, our simulation predicted
better ionic conductivity in crystalline P3MEET, yet ion
transport is still showed to happen mostly in the amorphous.
We suspect that our P3MEET and P3MEEMT samples have a
low degree of crystallinity due to the low boiling point of the
casting solvents. This argument is supported by the lack of the
“aggregate shoulder” in the absorption spectra of both
polymers (Figure 3b). Since most of the samples comprised
of amorphous polymers, it is not surprising that the ion
transport is dominated by the amorphous domain. Therefore,
the dominance of the ion transport in the amorphous domain
in our work may not be universal to all conjugated polymers.
An accurate picture of ion transport mechanism thus requires a
more rigorous study on polymer ﬁlms with systematically
varying degrees of crystallinity and will be a subject of
investigation in our future study.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we have performed a systematic study on the
connection between morphological structure and ionic
conduction characteristics of two polythiophene derivatives
P3MEET and P3MEEMT upon blending with LiTFSI. MD
simulations showed that oxygen atoms in P3MEEMT side-
chains possessed higher segmental mobility compared to those
of P3MEET, resulting in better Li+ ionic conductivity in the
amorphous phase. However, the ionic conductivity of
crystalline P3MEEMT was found to be lower than P3MEET
due to the formation of Li+ ion cages, a feature not observed in
P3MEET. Using GIWAXS measurements, we showed that
blending P3MEET and P3MEEMT with LiTFSI disrupted
their crystalline structure, resulting in lattice strains along the
side-chain stacking direction and signiﬁcant drops in rDoC,
which have a stronger eﬀect in P3MEET compared to
P3MEEMT. Introducing LiTFSI also exerted a stronger
inﬂuence on π−π interaction in P3MEET than in
P3MEEMT, which most likely originated from the proximity
of oxygen atom in P3MEET to the thiophene rings.
Additionally, LiTFSI was found to inﬁltrate both the
amorphous and crystalline domains at low concentrations
but preferably resided in the amorphous domain at high
LiTFSI concentrations. Temperature dependence studies of
ionic conductivity at diﬀerent concentration r in both
P3MEET and P3MEEMT showed that ionic conductivity
increased from r = 0.01 to 0.05 but reduced at higher
concentration due to ion pairing and transient cross-linking of
PEO side-chains to Li+ ions. Ionic transport was found to
occur in the amorphous regime and always higher in
P3MEEMT compared to P3MEET, consistent with our
prediction using the MD simulation.
Our results have demonstrated that side-chain modiﬁcation
can be a fruitful method to control morphology, ion uptake,
and ion transport in conjugated polymers. We also expect a
nontrivial eﬀect of side-chain chemistry on electronic transport
upon blending with ionic species, as LiTFSI has a diﬀerent
inﬂuence on rDoC (Figure 5b) and π−π interactions (Figure
6) for P3MEET and P3MEEMT. Side-chain engineering is,
thus, expected to be critical in the molecular design of mixed
conduction materials. Finally, our approach using computa-
tional simulations to guide synthesis and characterization can
be an elegant method toward studying the inﬂuence of
chemistry on self-assembly, structure, and ionic/electronic
conduction of soft materials.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
S
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemma-
ter.8b05257.
Details of polymer synthesis and puriﬁcation; 1H NMR
spectra; SEC spectra; DSC scanning curves of P3MEET
and P3MEEMT; UV−vis absorption spectra and AFM
images of P3MEET-LiTFSI and P3MEEMT-LiTFSI
thin ﬁlms; additional details of MD simulation; MSD
plots for side-chain in amorphous and crystalline
domains of P3MEET and P3MEEMT; Nyquist plot of
P3MEEMT-LiTFSI, r = 0.10 showing straight-line
behavior at low frequencies (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: fe13@cornell.edu (F.A.E.).
*E-mail: luscombe@uw.edu (C.K.L.).
*E-mail: nealey@uchicago.edu (P.F.N.).
*E-mail: shrayesh@uchicago.edu (S.N.P.).
ORCID
Ban Xuan Dong: 0000-0002-2873-5207
Fernando A. Escobedo: 0000-0002-4722-9836
Christine K. Luscombe: 0000-0001-7456-1343
Paul F. Nealey: 0000-0003-3889-142X
Shrayesh N. Patel: 0000-0003-3657-827X
Author Contributions
◆B.X.D., C.N., and J.W.O. contributed equally to the work.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1427

Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NSF DMREF Award Number
1629369. B.X.D. thanks Dr. Hongbo Feng from Nealey Group
for help in GPC measurement. C.N. thanks Dr. Mayank Misra
for help with DFT calculations. This research used resources of
the Advanced Photon Source, an Oﬃce of Science User
Facility operated for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) by
Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-
06CH11357. Parts of this work were carried out at the Soft
Matter Characterization Facility of the University of Chicago.
■REFERENCES
(1) Sekitani, T.; Zschieschang, U.; Klauk, H.; Someya, T. Flexible
Organic Transistors and Circuits with Extreme Bending Stability. Nat.
Mater. 2010, 9, 1015−1022.
(2) Hoth, C. N.; Schilinsky, P.; Choulis, S. A.; Brabec, C. J. Printing
Highly Efficient Organic Solar Cells. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 2806−2813.
(3) Sirringhaus, H. 25Th Anniversary Article: Organic Field-Effect
Transistors: The Path Beyond Amorphous Silicon. Adv. Mater. 2014,
26, 1319−1335.
(4) Dong, H.; Fu, X.; Liu, J.; Wang, Z.; Hu, W. 25th Anniversary
Article: Key Points for High-Mobility Organic Field-Effect Tran-
sistors. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 6158−6183.
(5) Patel, S. N.; Javier, A. E.; Stone, G. M.; Mullin, S. A.; Balsara, N.
P. Simultaneous Conduction of Electronic Charge and Lithium Ions
in Block Copolymers. ACS Nano 2012, 6, 1589−1600.
(6) Javier, A. E.; Patel, S. N.; Hallinan, D. T.; Srinivasan, V.; Balsara,
N. P. Simultaneous Electronic and Ionic Conduction in a Block
Copolymer: Application in Lithium Battery Electrodes. Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 9848−9851.
(7) Borsenberger, P. M.; Weiss, D. S. Organic Photoreceptors for
Xerography; CRC Press: New York, 1998.
(8) Geffroy, B.; le Roy, P.; Prat, C. Organic Light-Emitting Diode
(OLED) Technology: Materials, Devices and Display Technologies.
Polym. Int. 2006, 55, 572−582.
(9) Müllen, K.; Scherf, U. Organic Light Emitting Devices: Synthesis,
Properties and Applications; Wiley: New York, 2006.
(10) Günes, S.; Neugebauer, H.; Sariciftci, N. S. Conjugated
Polymer-Based Organic Solar Cells. Chem. Rev. 2007, 107, 1324−
1338.
(11) Kroon, R.; Lenes, M.; Hummelen, J. C.; Blom, P. W. M.; de
Boer, B. Small Bandgap Polymers for Organic Solar Cells (Polymer
Material Development in the Last 5 Years). Polym. Rev. 2008, 48,
531−582.
(12) Khodagholy, D.; Doublet, T.; Quilichini, P.; Gurfinkel, M.;
Leleux, P.; Ghestem, A.; Ismailova, E.; Hervé, T.; Sanaur, S.; Bernard,
C.; et al. In Vivo Recordings of Brain Activity Using Organic
Transistors. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, No. 1575.
(13) Rivnay, J.; Owens, R. M.; Malliaras, G. G. The Rise of Organic
Bioelectronics. Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 679−685.
(14) Owens, R. M.; Malliaras, G. G. Organic Electronics at the
Interface with Biology. MRS Bull. 2010, 35, 449−456.
(15) Lee, K.; Povlich, L. K.; Kim, J. Recent Advances in Fluorescent
and Colorimetric Conjugated Polymer-Based Biosensors. Analyst
2010, 135, 2179−2189.
(16) Scherson, D. A.; Palencsár, A. Batteries and Electrochemical
Capacitors. Electrochem. Soc. Interface 2006, 15, 17−22.
(17) Delacourt, C.; Laffont, L.; Bouchet, R.; Wurm, C.; Leriche, J.-
B.; Morcrette, M.; Tarascon, J.-M.; Masquelier, C. Toward Under-
standing of Electrical Limitations (Electronic, Ionic) in LiMPO[Sub
4] (M=Fe, Mn) Electrode Materials. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2005, 152,
A913.
(18) Liu, T.; Finn, L.; Yu, M.; Wang, H.; Zhai, T.; Lu, X.; Tong, Y.;
Li, Y. Polyaniline and Polypyrrole Pseudocapacitor Electrodes with
Excellent Cycling Stability. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 2522−2527.
(19) Mortimer, R. J.; Dyer, A. L.; Reynolds, J. R. Electrochromic
Organic and Polymeric Materials for Display Applications. Displays
2006, 27, 2−18.
(20) O’Regan, B.; Gratzel, M. A Low-Cost, High-Efficiency Solar-
Cell Based on Dye-Sensitized Colloidal TiO2 Films. Nature 1991,
353, 737−740.
(21) Haines, C. S.; Lima, M. D.; Li, N.; Spinks, G. M.; Foroughi, J.;
Madden, J. D. W.; Kim, S. H.; Fang, S.; De Andrade, M. J.; Göktepe,
F.; et al. Artificial Muscles from Fishing Line and Sewing Thread.
Science 2014, 343, 868−872.
(22) Inal, S.; Rivnay, J.; Suiu, A. O.; Malliaras, G. G.; McCulloch, I.
Conjugated Polymers in Bioelectronics. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51,
1368−1376.
(23) Giridharagopal, R.; Flagg, L. Q.; Harrison, J. S.; Ziffer, M. E.;
Onorato, J.; Luscombe, C. K.; Ginger, D. S. Electrochemical Strain
Microscopy Probes Morphology-Induced Variations in Ion Uptake
and Performance in Organic Electrochemical Transistors. Nat. Mater.
2017, 16, 737−742.
(24) Dong, B. X.; Huang, B.; Tan, A.; Green, P. F. Nanoscale
Orientation Effects on Carrier Transport in a Low-Band-Gap
Polymer. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 17490−17498.
(25) Mollinger, S. A.; Krajina, B. A.; Noriega, R.; Salleo, A.;
Spakowitz, A. J. Percolation, Tie-Molecules, and the Microstructural
Determinants of Charge Transport in Semicrystalline Conjugated
Polymers. ACS Macro Lett. 2015, 4, 708−712.
(26) Duong, D. T.; Ho, V.; Shang, Z.; Mollinger, S.; Mannsfeld, S. C.
B.; Dacuña, J.; Toney, M. F.; Segalman, R.; Salleo, A. Mechanism of
Crystallization and Implications for Charge Transport in Poly(3-
Ethylhexylthiophene) Thin Films. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24, 4515−
4521.
(27) Kline, R. J.; Mcgehee, M. D.; Kadnikova, E. N.; Liu, J.; Fre, J.
M. J.; Toney, M. F. Dependence of Regioregular Poly ( 3-
Hexylthiophene ) Film Morphology and Field-Effect Mobility on
Molecular Weight. Macromolecules 2005, 3312−3319.
(28) Zhang, X.; Bronstein, H.; Kronemeijer, A. J.; Smith, J.; Kim, Y.;
Kline, R. J.; Richter, L. J.; Anthopoulos, T. D.; Sirringhaus, H.; Song,
K.; et al. Molecular Origin of High Field-Effect Mobility in an
Indacenodithiophene-Benzothiadiazole Copolymer. Nat. Commun.
2013, 4, No. 2238.
(29) Inal, S.; Malliaras, G. G.; Rivnay, J. Optical Study of
Electrochromic Moving Fronts for the Investigation of Ion Transport
in Conducting Polymers. J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4, 3942−3947.
(30) Rivnay, J.; Inal, S.; Collins, B. A.; Sessolo, M.; Stavrinidou, E.;
Strakosas, X.; Tassone, C.; Delongchamp, D. M.; Malliaras, G. G.
Structural Control of Mixed Ionic and Electronic Transport in
Conducting Polymers. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, No. 11287.
(31) Stavrinidou, E.; Leleux, P.; Rajaona, H.; Khodagholy, D.;
Rivnay, J.; Lindau, M.; Sanaur, S.; Malliaras, G. G. Direct
Measurement of Ion Mobility in a Conducting Polymer. Adv.
Mater. 2013, 25, 4488−4493.
(32) Nielsen, C. B.; Giovannitti, A.; Sbircea, D. T.; Bandiello, E.;
Niazi, M. R.; Hanifi, D. A.; Sessolo, M.; Amassian, A.; Malliaras, G.
G.; Rivnay, J.; et al. Molecular Design of Semiconducting Polymers
for High-Performance Organic Electrochemical Transistors. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 10252−10259.
(33) Giovannitti, A.; Sbircea, D.-T.; Inal, S.; Nielsen, C. B.;
Bandiello, E.; Hanifi, D. A.; Sessolo, M.; Malliaras, G. G.; McCulloch,
I.; Rivnay, J. Controlling the Mode of Operation of Organic
Transistors through Side-Chain Engineering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 2016, 113, 12017−12022.
(34) Pipertzis, A.; Mühlinghaus, M.; Mezger, M.; Scherf, U.;
Floudas, G. Polymerized Ionic Liquids with Polythiophene Back-
bones: Self-Assembly, Thermal Properties, and Ion Conduction.
Macromolecules 2018, 51, 6440−6450.
(35) Jiang, Z. GIXSGUI: A MATLAB Toolbox for Grazing-
Incidence X-Ray Scattering Data Visualization and Reduction, and
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1428

Indexing of Buried Three-Dimensional Periodic Nanostructured
Films. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2015, 48, 917−926.
(36) Dong, B. X.; Strzalka, J.; Jiang, Z.; Li, H.; Stein, G. E.; Green, P.
F. Crystallization Mechanism and Charge Carrier Transport in
MAPLE-Deposited Conjugated Polymer Thin Films. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 44799−44810.
(37) Jimison, L. H.; Himmelberger, S.; Duong, D. T.; Rivnay, J.;
Toney, M. F.; Salleo, A. Vertical Confinement and Interface Effects on
the Microstructure and Charge Transport of P3HT Thin Films. J.
Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 2013, 51, 611−620.
(38) Himmelberger, S.; Dacuña, J.; Rivnay, J.; Jimison, L. H.;
McCarthy-Ward, T.; Heeney, M.; McCulloch, I.; Toney, M. F.; Salleo,
A. Effects of Confinement on Microstructure and Charge Transport in
High Performance Semicrystalline Polymer Semiconductors. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2013, 23, 2091−2098.
(39) Dacuña, J.; Salleo, A. Modeling Space-Charge Limited Currents
in Organic Semiconductors: Extracting Trap Density and Mobility I.
Introduction. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, No. 195209.
(40) Noriega, R.; Rivnay, J.; Vandewal, K.; Koch, F. P. V.; Stingelin,
N.; Smith, P.; Toney, M. F.; Salleo, A. A General Relationship
between Disorder, Aggregation and Charge Transport in Conjugated
Polymers. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12, 1038−1044.
(41) Bässler, H. Charge Transport in Disordered Organic Photo-
conductors a Monte Carlo Simulation Study. Phys. Status Solidi 1993,
175, 15−56.
(42) Baker, J. L.; Jimison, L. H.; Mannsfeld, S.; Volkman, S.; Yin, S.;
Subramanian, V.; Salleo, A.; Alivisatos, A. P.; Toney, M. F.
Quantification of Thin Film Crystallographic Orientation Using X-
Ray Diffraction with an Area Detector. Langmuir 2010, 26, 9146−
9151.
(43) DeLongchamp, D. M.; Kline, R. J.; Fischer, D. A.; Richter, L. J.;
Toney, M. F. Molecular Characterization of Organic Electronic Films.
Adv. Mater. 2011, 23, 319−337.
(44) Kroon, R.; Kiefer, D.; Stegerer, D.; Yu, L.; Sommer, M.; Müller,
C. Polar Side Chains Enhance Processability, Electrical Conductivity,
and Thermal Stability of a Molecularly p-Doped Polythiophene. Adv.
Mater. 2017, 29, No. 1700930.
(45) Kayunkid, N.; Uttiya, S.; Brinkmann, M. Structural Model of
Regioregular Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) Obtained by Electron Diffrac-
tion Analysis. Macromolecules 2010, 43, 4961−4967.
(46) Nosé, S. A Unified Formulation of the Constant Temperature
Molecular Dynamics Methods. J. Chem. Phys. 1984, 81, 511−519.
(47) To, T. T.; Adams, S. Modelling of P3HT:PCBM Interface
Using Coarse-Grained Forcefield Derived from Accurate Atomistic
Forcefield. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16, 4653−4663.
(48) Berthier, C.; Gorecki, W.; Minier, M.; Armand, M. B.;
Chabagno, J. M.; Rigaud, P. Microscopic Investigation of Ionic
Conductivity in Alkali Metal Salts-Poly(Ethylene Oxide) Adducts.
Solid Sate Ionics 1983, 11, 91−95.
(49) Wintersgill, M. C.; Fontanella, J. J.; Pak, Y. S.; Greenbaum, S.
G.; Al-Mudaris, A.; Chadwick, A. V. Electrical Conductivity,
Differential Scanning Calorimetry and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Studies of Amorphous Poly(Ethylene Oxide) Complexed with
Sodium Salts. Polymer 1989, 30, 1123−1126.
(50) Borodin, O.; Smith, G. D. Mechanism of Ion Transport in
Amorphous Poly(Ethylene Oxide)/ LiTFSI from Molecular Dynam-
ics Simulations. Macromolecules 2006, 39, 1620−1629.
(51) Chang, J.-F.; Sun, B.; Breiby, D. W.; Nielsen, M. M.; Sölling, T.
I.; Giles, M.; McCulloch, I.; Sirringhaus, H. Enhanced Mobility of
Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) Transistors by Spin-Coating from High-
Boiling-Point Solvents. Chem. Mater. 2004, 16, 4772−4776.
(52) Dong, B. X.; Li, A.; Strzalka, J.; Stein, G. E.; Green, P. F.
Molecular Organization in MAPLE-Deposited Conjugated Polymer
Thin Films and the Implications for Carrier Transport Characteristics.
J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 2017, 55, 39−48.
(53) Hammond, M. R.; Kline, R. J.; Herzing, A. A.; Richter, L. J.;
Germack, D. S.; Ro, H.-W.; Soles, C. L.; Fischer, D. A.; Xu, T.; Yu, L.;
et al. Molecular Order in High-Efficiency Polymer/Fullerene Bulk
Heterojunction Solar Cells. ACS Nano 2011, 5, 8248−8257.
(54) Guardado, J. O.; Salleo, A. Structural Effects of Gating Poly(3-
Hexylthiophene) through an Ionic Liquid. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017,
27, No. 1701791.
(55) Thelen, J. L.; Wu, S. L.; Javier, A. E.; Srinivasan, V.; Balsara, N.
P.; Patel, S. N. Relationship between Mobility and Lattice Strain in
Electrochemically Doped Poly(3-Hexylthiophene). ACS Macro Lett.
2015, 4, 1386−1391.
(56) Thomas, E. M.; Brady, M. A.; Nakayama, H.; Popere, B. C.;
Segalman, R. A.; Chabinyc, M. L. X-Ray Scattering Reveals Ion-
Induced Microstructural Changes During Electrochemical Gating of
Poly(3-Hexylthiophene). Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, No. 1803687.
(57) Paul, D. K.; Mccreery, R.; Karan, K. Proton Transport Property
in Supported Nafion Nanothin Films by Electrochemical Impedance
Spectroscopy. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2014, 161, F1395−1402.
(58) Arges, C. G.; Kambe, Y.; Suh, H. S.; Ocola, L. E.; Nealey, P. F.
Perpendicularly Aligned, Anion Conducting Nanochannels in Block
Copolymer Electrolyte Films. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 1377−1389.
(59) Sharon, D.; Bennington, P.; Liu, C.; Kambe, Y.; Dong, B. X.;
Burnett, V. F.; Dolejsi, M.; Grocke, G.; Patel, S. N.; Nealey, P. F.
Interrogation of Electrochemical Properties of Polymer Electrolyte
Thin Films with Interdigitated Electrodes. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2018,
165, H1028−H1039.
(60) Liu, Z.; Dong, B. X.; Misra, M.; Sun, Y.; Strzalka, J.; Patel, S. N.;
Escobedo, F. A.; Nealey, P. F.; Ober, C. K. Self-Assembly Behavior of
An Oligothiophene-Based Conjugated Liquid Crystal and Its
Implication for Ionic Conductivity Characteristics. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2018, No. 1805220.
(61) Lascaud, S.; Perrier, M.; Vallee, A.; Besner, S.; Prud’homme, J.;
Armand, M. Phase Diagrams and Conductivity Behavior of Poly-
(Ethylene Oxide)-Molten Salt Rubbery Electrolytes. Macromolecules
1994, 27, 7469−7477.
Chemistry of Materials
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05257
Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429
1429

