FULL PAPER
1800594  (1 of 9)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.advopticalmat.de
Conjugated Polymer Blends for High Contrast Black-to-
Transmissive Electrochromism
Lisa R. Savagian, Anna M. Österholm, Dwanleen Eric Shen, Dylan T. Christiansen, 
Michael Kuepfert, and John R. Reynolds*
DOI: 10.1002/adom.201800594
are useful for communicating text and 
complex images via reflective displays in 
electronic paper devices, wearable “smart 
glasses,” and transmissive panel monitors. 
Essential to the utility of such materials is 
the ability to repeatedly transition between 
two optical states in a rapid, on-demand 
fashion.
π-Conjugated electrochromic polymers 
(ECPs) are a class of electrochromic mate-
rials that offer an appealing platform for 
the realization of true black-to-transmis-
sive electrochromism. ECPs can undergo 
full colored-to-colorless transitions on 
rapid time scales (often in second to sub-
second regimes,[1] with high coloration 
efficiencies, contrasts (Δ%T at λmax) up to 
70%, switching stability over thousands 
to hundreds of thousands of cycles, and 
in many cases, colorless states that can 
be refreshed by a small current or voltage 
pulse.[1,2] Moreover, ECPs can be readily 
tuned for color through straightforward 
chemical modification of the polymer back-
bone. The addition of solubilizing aliphatic or polar side chains 
allows for these materials to be processed as electronic inks in 
low-cost and large-scale processing techniques, such as inkjet-
printing, along with blade-, spray-, and slot die coating.[3–10] In 
recent years, a deeper understanding of the structure–property 
relationships that control the color and switching properties 
of ECPs has enabled the development of extensive libraries of 
cathodically coloring polymers. These materials have been suc-
cessfully integrated into plastic[5,11,12] and paper-based[7,13,14] 
electrochromic devices, making them promising candidates for 
flexible or transient electronic displays.
While most colored-to-transmissive ECPs have π-electronic 
structures that have been carefully modified to absorb spe-
cific wavelengths of visible light for achieving highly saturated 
colors, a black ECP must absorb across the entire visible spec-
trum in its colored state. Meanwhile, the transmissive state of 
the material must absorb as little visible light as possible in 
the same wavelength range for optimal contrast and optical 
clarity. Developing a material that undergoes such drastic spec-
tral changes upon application of an electrical bias presents a 
unique materials design challenge. An additional complexity 
arises when seeking to develop black-to-transmissive electro-
chromic materials that are able to transition through interme-
diate shades of gray, as well.
Next-generation electrochromic technologies, such as dimmable fenestration, 
eyewear integrated displays, and optical shutters require materials that 
reversibly transition between highly transmissive and broadly absorbing 
achromatic states, often with minimal intermediate coloration. In this work, 
it is shown how the properties of dioxythiophene-based electrochromic 
polymers (ECPs) can be leveraged through straightforward color mixing to 
yield high-contrast, black-to-transmissive materials with low driving voltages 
(<1 V), extended functional lifetimes, and minimal transient chromaticity. 
Drawing from a family of five soluble colored-to-colorless switching polymers 
(including ECP-cyan, -green, -magenta, -yellow, and a newly reported ECP-
orange), three unique cathodically coloring polymer blends are reported, with 
achromatic neutral states (C*ab < 5) and integrated optical contrast exceeding 
40% across the entire visible spectrum (380–780 nm). By incorporating 
different high-gap and dual-band absorbing ECPs, subtle control is demon-
strated over both the extreme and intermediate coloration of the blends. This 
work showcases how solution coprocessing of ECPs can be used to access 
highly targeted achromatic hues while also enabling fine-tuned neutral optical 
transition between black and transmissive states.
L. R. Savagian, Dr. A. M. Österholm, Dr. D. E. Shen, D. T. Christiansen, 
Prof. J. R. Reynolds
School of Chemistry and Biochemistry
School of Materials Science and Engineering
Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics
Georgia Tech Polymer Network
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0400, USA
E-mail: reynolds@chemistry.gatech.edu
M. Kuepfert
Re-synthesis Laboratory
NC/IS
BASF Corporation
Tarrytown, NY 10591, USA
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adom.201800594.
Electrochromism
1. Introduction
Electrochromic materials that reversibly switch between black 
and transmissive states are highly sought-after in a number 
of commercial and military applications, including energy-
saving dimmable windows, user-controlled protective eyewear, 
and optical privacy shutters. In addition, black electrochromes 
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (2 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
A number of strategies have been invoked in pursuit of black-
to-transmissive ECPs. Synthetic approaches have targeted poly-
mers with backbones designed for broad absorption of visible 
light. Beaujuge et al. reported the first black-to-transmissive ECP 
using a cathodically coloring random copolymer of 3,4-propyl-
enedioxythiophene (ProDOT) donor and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole 
(BTD) acceptor moieties.[15] Two properties of this polymer led 
to broad absorption across the visible region. First, BTD-based 
donor–acceptor polymers are characterized by a dual absorb-
ance at long and short wavelengths, which inherently absorb 
more visible light than most traditional all-donor polymers that 
exhibit single absorbance bands. Second, the random nature of 
the copolymerization leads to varying combinations of donor 
and acceptor along the polymer backbone, each of which absorb 
in different regions of the visible spectrum. Further optimiza-
tion of the donor-to-acceptor feed ratio yielded a black-to-trans-
missive ECP (herein referred to as “ECP-black”) that absorbed 
most broadly across the visible range.[16] This so-called “donor-
acceptor approach,” which involves copolymerizing electron-poor 
and electron-rich monomers, has since been employed to yield 
other black ECPs.[17–19] Broad absorption across the visible range 
has also been achieved in alternating donor–acceptor polymers 
by incorporating multiple acceptors along the backbone, such 
as benzoquinoxaline, benzoselenadiazole, and benzotriazole.[20] 
Beyond donor–acceptor systems, cobalt-based supramolecular 
metallopolymers have been pursued as black electrochromes. A 
salient example involves a Co(II)–bisterpyridine metallosupra-
molecular polymer that switches between a highly transmissive, 
pale yellow neutral state and a broadly absorbing darkened state 
upon electrochemical reduction.[21] Another interesting approach 
was demonstrated by Sassi et al. in 2016, where a small mole-
cule Weitz-type chromophore that absorbs at short wavelengths, 
was tethered onto an ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT)-ProDOT 
copoly­mer that absorbs at longer wavelengths. When used in 
conjunction with a Prussian Blue counter electrode, this material 
yielded a black-to-clear electrochromic device.[22] A final family of 
materials that has demonstrated broadly absorbing colored states 
are triphenylamine (TPA)-based polymers. Both the ProDOT-
based polymers described above and TPA electrochromes are 
p-type materials that switch between a neutral and oxidized 
state. However, when compared to ProDOT-based polymers, 
the spectra of TPA polymers are significantly blueshifted due to 
their shorter effective conjugation lengths. As a result, neutral 
TPA polymers often absorb in the UV and appear highly color-
less, and upon oxidation, they absorb broadly in the visible range 
upon and appear black. On the other hand, cathodically-coloring 
ProDOT-based materials appear colored in the neutral state and, 
upon oxidation, absorb broadly in the NIR and appear trans-
missive. Through structural tuning, a TPA-based polymer with 
a black oxidized state and a colorless neutral state was recently 
developed.[23] Despite this progress, many of these systems do not 
offer sufficiently broad spectral coverage, especially in the high- 
and low-energy ranges of the visible region. In particular, cathodi-
cally coloring systems like poly(ProDOT)s often suffer from the 
infrared absorption of the oxidized chromophore tailing into the 
visible region, leaving a blue tint in the transmissive state.
Given the challenges associated with developing a color-neutral 
and high optical contrast material, an alternative approach toward 
black-to-transmissive electrochromism is to blend vibrantly 
colored chromophores whose collective absorption entirely covers 
the visible spectrum. This can, in theory, be accomplished using 
the three traditional subtractive primaries, cyan, magenta, and 
yellow (CMY), whose respective absorbance bands span the low-, 
mid-, and high-energy regions of the visible spectrum, or by two-
component combinations of dual-band and midgap absorbers, 
such as green and magenta. Previous work has demonstrated 
such color mixing principles in dual or stacked black-to-trans-
missive electrochromic devices[24–27] as well as by solution co-
processing of individual cathodically coloring chromophores into 
a single optically active layer.[26,28] To demonstrate the ability to 
finely control hue through color mixing, our group has previously 
utilized solution co-processing of multicomponent ECP blends to 
tune the dynamic brown coloration in electrochromic eyewear.[29] 
This blending approach is also advantageous when targeting 
black-to-transmissive switching, as it allows for facile tuning of 
optical properties without requiring new material synthesis or 
complex electrode architectures. In particular, solution coproc-
essing offers a great deal of versatility and predictability and can 
readily be adapted to yield different hues of black (e.g., charcoal 
or noir) by simply tuning the mass ratios of the constituent ECPs.
Blending electrochromes for black-to-transmissive switching, 
however, demands special consideration of how the optical 
evolution proceeds with applied electrochemical potential. For 
applications such as dimmable fenestration and eyewear, where 
it is desirable to dial in intermediate shades, bleaching and col-
oration should proceed through color-neutral gray tones, rather 
than vibrantly colored intermediates. Developing an ECP blend 
with such properties requires that the consitutent chromophore 
bleach within a similar voltage window and in a concerted 
fashion. However, because the color of an ECP is determined 
by the effective conjugation length and the extent of π orbital 
overlap in response to various steric and electronic effects, 
any attempt to manipulate the color will often also result in a 
change in the electrochemical properties of the material. Conse-
quently, while it may be relatively straightforward to find a com-
bination of ECPs whose collective absorption profiles cover the 
visible range, it is much more challenging to also ensure that 
the redox properties of the components coordinate to bleach 
and color at identical potentials and similar rates. To date, no 
study has demonstrated how to control both the extreme and 
intermediate coloration of black-to-transmissive ECP blends.
In this work, solution coprocessing is presented as a means 
for overcoming the many challenges associated with high-
contrast black-to-transmissive electrochromism. We demon-
strate how the composition of ECP blends can be strategically 
tailored to access a range of black hues with complete coverage 
of the visible spectrum, enhanced redox stability, and achro-
matic optical transitions to highly transmissive states. Utilizing 
a collection of five soluble ProDOT-based copolymers, we pre-
sent an expanded subtractive color mixing approach beyond the 
traditional CMY model and report a series of three-component 
black ECP blends. By including a green and a new orange 
colored-to-colorless polymer in our mixing scheme, we can 
control the colored states, intermediate hues, and long-term col-
oration of black-to-transmissive ECP films. With integrated con-
trast across the visible spectrum exceeding 40%, these materials 
are significantly more color-neutral than our previously reported 
ECP-black and can be tuned for achromatic optical transitions.
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (3 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Electrochromic Properties of ECP Blends
Because the perception of color is highly subjective, it is impor-
tant to be able to quantify the exact hue of various colors for 
valid comparisons. The human eye has three types of cone cells 
that are sensitive to unique wavelength ranges of light; if the 
total spectral power distribution of light is weighted to account 
for this relative sensitivity, three effective stimulus values are 
generated. These three values can objectively quantify a color.[30] 
Quantification of chromaticity can be accomplished in the 
CIELAB coordinate system, where a 3D vector space defines the 
chromaticity and luminosity of a color. Here, L* represents the 
lightness of a color, where 0 is black and 100 is diffuse white. 
The a* and b* axes (+/-128) represent the relative saturation 
of four quaternary colors: red (+a*), green (-a*), blue (-b*), 
and yellow (+b*). A vibrant color with high degree of saturation 
will have large a* and/or b* values, such as Coke Red (L* = 53, 
a* = 80, b* = 59).[31] A truly achromatic color (e.g., black, gray) 
can be accessed when a material’s absorbance, combined with 
the nonlinear spectral sensitivity of the human eye, completely 
and uniformly attenuates the intensity of all visible light. Ach-
romatic shades have relatively equal contributions from each 
of the four chromatic components and therefore map to low 
(a*, b*) coordinates (i.e., a* and b* values close to 0). A black-
to-clear electrochromic material with intermediate gray shades 
would ideally only exhibit a variation of L* upon switching. The 
color chromaticity (C*ab) represents the overall hue of the color 
and is defined as the magnitude of the vector in the (a*, b*) 
plane, as indicated by Equation (1). Color-neutral shades (e.g., 
black and gray) have equal contributions from each of the qua-
ternary chromatic components and therefore are associated 
with low C*ab values.
(
)
(
)
*
* 2
* 2
C
a
b
ab =
+
	
(1)
When blending polymers to achieve a color neutral black, five 
dioxythiophene-based polymers were selected from our group’s 
collection of colored-to-colorless ECPs. These ECPs readily dis-
solve in toluene and can be co-processed from solution into 
homogeneous electrochromic films. Each blend was formu-
lated to include a high-gap absorber (ECP-yellow or -orange), a 
midgap absorber (ECP-magenta), and dual-band chromophore 
with strong absorption bands in both the low- and high-energy 
ends of the visible spectrum (ECP-cyan or -green). Not only 
does this color mixing scheme offer a means toward materials 
with broad spectral coverage in the colored state, but it also 
allows for the high-, mid-, and low-energy absorption intensity 
of the blend to be independently manipulated, which is impor-
tant when fine-tuning the blend composition to a desired ach-
romatic state. In addition, we show that by varying the blend 
components we are able to manipulate the intermediate colored 
states and the switching performance. Following this model, 
three different black blends were formulated: a conventional 
CMY blend (comprising ECP-cyan, -magenta, and -yellow), a 
CMO blend (ECP-cyan, -magenta, and -orange), and a GMO 
blend (ECP-green, -magenta, and -orange), as shown schemati-
cally in Figure 1.
The redox and optical properties of the individual blend com-
ponents are summarized in Table 1, with the corresponding 
spectra and redox characterizations shown in Figure  2 as 
well as Figures S1 and S2 in the Supporting Information. 
Figure 2A–C shows the neutral state spectra of the individual 
ECPs as well as their composite blend spectra, and Figure 2D 
compares the cyclic voltammograms of the blend compo-
nents. The noteworthy differences between the two high-gap 
absorbers (ECP-yellow and ECP-orange) and the two low-gap 
absorbers (ECP-green and ECP-cyan) are the onset of oxidation 
(Eonset, determined by differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) as 
shown in Figure  S1 of the Supporting Information) and the 
potential required to reach the transmissive state (Eclear). These 
differences, as we will demonstrate, have a substantial impact 
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
Figure 1.  Repeat unit structures of ProDOT-based conjugated electrochromic copolymers used for blending and schematic of subtractive mixing 
strategies for accessing black. R = 2-ethylhexyl.
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (4 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
on the electrochromic switching properties and intermediate 
coloration of blended ECPs. Eclear is determined spectroscopi-
cally and corresponds to the potential above which we observe 
no further change in the level of transmittance in the visible 
range upon further oxidation. The potential-dependent absorp-
tion spectra for the various blend components used in this 
study are shown in Figure S2 of the Supporting Information.
ECP-yellow and ECP-orange have similar λmax values, but 
ECP-orange is slightly more broadly absorbing, as shown in 
Figure 2 (a direct comparison can be found in Figure S3a of the 
Supporting Information). This spectral difference, though minor, 
results in a significant difference in perceived color. This can 
be explained by the photopic response of the human eye. The 
increased spectral coverage of ECP-orange encompasses a region 
of the visible spectrum where the human eye is most sensitive to 
changes in the wavelength (≈480–520 nm). Therefore, subtle dif-
ferences on the low-energy side of the absorbance spectra of ECP-
orange and ECP-yellow are exaggerated when these materials are 
viewed by the human eye, resulting in noticeably different colors. 
This is reflected by the large difference in the a* values associ-
ated with the reduced states of the two ECPs (Table 1).
When comparing the redox properties of ECP-orange and 
ECP-yellow, the difference in oxidation potential arises from a 
combination of both steric and electronic effects. In ECP-yellow, 
the high degree of aromaticity of the benzene ring and the bulki-
ness of the ethylhexyloxy groups obstruct planarization to a qui-
noidal geometry in the oxidized state, giving rise to the high 
Eonset (Figure 2D) and Eclear (Figure S2, Supporting Information). 
The 3,4-dioctylthiophene comonomer used in ECP-orange, on 
the other hand, is inherently easier to oxidize than the phenylene 
unit in ECP-yellow due to the decreased aromatic stabiliza-
tion associated with the thiophene heterocycle. This results in a 
higher HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) energy and, 
consequently, a lower Eonset. By replacing the 3,4-alkoxy function-
alized thiophene units in ECP-yellow with 3,4-propylenedioxy-
functionalized analogs in ECP-orange, the functional groups 
are further away from the conjugated backbone, which also 
decreases the steric hindrance obstructing planarization. The 
backbone of ECP-orange, being exclusively composed of thio-
phene-based repeat units, also allows for an anti configuration  
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
Figure 2.  Superimposed absorbance spectra of individual electrochromic polymer components and blends (black lines) of A) cyan–magenta–yellow, 
B) cyan–magenta–orange, and C) green–magenta–orange. D) Superimposed cyclic voltammograms of ECPs blended in this study, performed on drop-
casted films on glassy carbon electrodes in 0.5 M TBAPF6/PC.
Table 1.  Redox and optical properties of ECPs used in blends.
ECP
λmax [nm]
Eonset [V] vs 
Fc/Fc+
Eclear [V] vs 
Fc/Fc+
a*, b*
Contrast at λmax 
(%)a)
ECP-yellow
465
0.47
0.7
9, 76
60
ECP-orange
468
0.18
0.5
29, 68
65
ECP-magenta
544
0.12
0.3
59, -16
70
ECP-cyan
406, 687
0.22
0.6
-30, -15
50b)
ECP-green
458, 672
0.13
0.5
-36, 2
50b)
a)Contrast is measured for films coated to a transmittance of 10% +/-2% at λmax; 
b)For ECP-cyan and ECP-green, contrast was measured at the low-energy absorb-
ance band.
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (5 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
between rings, i.e. the 3,4 positions between neighboring rings 
are antiperiplanar, which in turn reduces inter-ring strain and 
allows for greater backbone planarization in the neutral state 
when compared to ECP-yellow. Additionally, this allows the oxi-
dized state of ECP-orange to more easily assume a quinoidal-type 
bonding structure and therefore exhibit a lower Eclear relative to 
ECP-yellow.
When evaluating the two low-gap components, ECP-green 
and ECP-cyan, the difference in Eonset is the result of the higher 
relative ratio of the electron-rich (ProDOT) to the electron-
poor (BTD) moieties in ECP-green. This increase in electron-
richness destabilizes the HOMO level of ECP-green relative to 
ECP-cyan, resulting in a decreased Eonset, as well as cathodically 
shifted redox peaks in the cyclic voltammograms, as shown 
in Figure 2D. The higher ProDOT content in ECP-green also 
facilitates planarization and charge carrier delocalization, 
leading to a 0.1 V lower Eclear (Table 1). The optical properties 
of ECP-cyan and ECP-green are fairly similar, as both exhibits 
a dual-band absorbance profile characteristic of many donor–
acceptor polymers. The band at longer wavelengths arises from 
a transition between a delocalized HOMO and a LUMO (lowest 
occupied molecular orbital) localized on the acceptor, while the 
short wavelength absorption band originates from a transition 
between the HOMO and the LUMO+n orbital localized on the 
donor unit.[32] By increasing or decreasing the donor content in 
the ECP backbone, the position of the high-energy band can be 
readily red- or blueshifted, whereas the low energy band is less 
sensitive to the donor–acceptor ratio. The higher ProDOT con-
tent in ECP-green results in a redshifting of the high-energy 
band of this ECP by about 50 nm relative to ECP-cyan, whereas 
the low energy band is blueshifted only by 15 nm. This sig-
nificant shifting of the high-energy band results in ECP-green 
absorbing more in the middle of the visible spectrum (450–
500 nm) and less at the extremes when compared to ECP-cyan.
To make color-neutral blends, the relative amount of each 
ECP was adjusted such that resulting films exhibited relatively 
uniform spectral coverage and low chromaticity (C*ab  < 5) in 
the colored state (Figure 2 and Table 2). As shown in Table 2, 
each of the three-component ECP blends are significantly more 
color neutral than the random copolymer ECP-black (C*ab = 16) 
which has a slight purple hue and a higher negative b* (see 
comparison in Figures 3A and 4).
The enhanced color neutrality of the CMY, CMO, and GMO 
blends can be attributed to their broadened and more uni-
form absorbance across the visible spectrum, especially below 
450  nm and above 750 nm, where these blends absorb more 
effectively than ECP-black (Figure  3A). The different ratio of 
blend components is due to subtle differences in the absorb-
ance spectra of each of the ECPs. For instance, when com-
paring CMY with CMO, the absorption band of ECP-orange is 
broader with respect to that of ECP-yellow, so the CMO blend 
requires less of the mid-gap chromophore ECP-magenta to 
achieve color neutrality. Similarly, the high-energy absorption 
band of ECP-cyan is blueshifted relative to that of ECP-green. 
As a result, in the GMO blend the absorbance of ECP-orange 
and the high-energy band of ECP-green overlap more closely 
than ECP-orange and ECP-cyan in the CMO blend. To com-
pensate, the amount of ECP-orange was reduced fourfold in 
the GMO blend, compared to the CMO blend. Finally, ECP-
cyan absorbs more low- and high-energy light than ECP-green, 
which impacts the blend in two ways. First, because the high- 
and low-energy absorption bands are brought closer together in 
ECP-green, slightly less of the midgap absorber (ECP-magenta) 
relative to the dual-band absorber is required to formulate the 
GMO blend than the CMO blend. Second, CMO and CMY 
blends have broader spectral coverage than the GMO blend; 
however, GMO is still very color-neutral (C*ab  = 3.3), as the 
human eye is least sensitive the light transmitted at the extreme 
ends of the visible spectrum.
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
Table 2.  Color coordinates and color saturation of evaluated ECP blends 
and ECP-black.
Material
Mass ratios
Colored state
Transmissive state
L*
a*
b*
C*ab
L*
a*
b*
C*ab
Blends
CMY
10-4-2
45.1
2.5
-1.0
2.7
82.1
-7.1
-1.5
7.3
CMO
10-4-4
40.1
4.4
-1.3
4.6
81.5
-4.7
-4.8
6.7
GMO
10-3.4-1
37.7
-1.7
-2.8
3.3
81.7
-4.6
-6.1
7.6
ECP-Black
–
40.0
-3.1
-15.7
16.0
84.2
-5.4
-4.7
7.1
Figure  3.  Superimposed A) absorbance and B) transmittance spectra for ECP-black (black lines), CMY black (yellow lines), CMO black (orange 
lines), and GMO black (green lines) in the oxidized state (+0.8 V) and reduced state (0.0 V). Dashed lines denote the limits of the visible spectrum 
(380–780 nm).
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (6 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
When oxidized to their colorless states, the transmittance 
spectra of the blends all follow a similar trend across the visible, 
with each material transmitting the greatest amount of green–
yellow light (500–600 nm) as shown in Figure  3B. For electro-
chromic materials, contrast is often evaluated as the change in 
transmittance between the reduced and oxidized states at a single 
wavelength. For broadly absorbing hues like black, it is more 
descriptive to define contrast as the change in integrated transmit-
tance across the entire visible spectrum, which spans from 380 
to 780 nm according to Commission internationale de l’éclairage 
(CIE) standards.[33] Among the blends, the CMY film has the 
lowest integrated transmittance in the colorless state, presumably 
due to the reduced electrochromic contrast of ECP-yellow when 
compared to ECP-orange, especially above 650 nm (Figure S3a, 
Supporting Information), as well as the larger relative amount of 
ECP-cyan. While both the CMO and the GMO can reach a similar 
level of transmittance in the oxidized state, the higher integrated 
contrast of the CMO blends is a result of the broader spectral 
coverage achieved by the colored state of this blend. While ECP-
black has the highest integrated transmittance in the oxidized 
state, it does not have the highest integrated contrast. This can 
be explained by ECP-black’s colored state, which has a relatively 
narrower absorption profile in the visible range than the blends 
in the visible region, leading to a higher integrated transmittance 
at +0.0 V. Each of the blends exhibits an integrated contrast across 
the entire visible spectrum greater than or equal to that of ECP-
black (40%) with the CMO blend having the highest integrated 
contrast (45%) among all black materials evaluated (see Table 3).
While each blend studied has a unique composition, their 
electrochemical properties do not differ much. As demon-
strated in Figure S4 in the Supporting Information, the CMO, 
GMO, and CMY blends and ECP-black all pass similar amount 
of current and require a comparable charge to switch between 
the colored and colorless states (Table 3). Each black formula-
tion undergoes a broad oxidation within a potential window 
ranging from +0.1 V to 0.8 V. The Eonset for each blend occurs 
around +0.08 V (Table 3), while ECP-black begins oxidizing at 
0.02 V versus Fc/Fc+. Interestingly, the CMY, CMO, and GMO 
blends all oxidize at slightly lower potentials than the Eonset of 
their constituent ECPs, suggesting that there are intermolecular 
interactions in these blends that may result in the formation 
of polymer domains that are more susceptible to electrochem-
ical oxidation. However, a more important property for these 
cathodically coloring blends is the Eclear. As expected, the CMY 
blend has the highest Eclear as a result the ECP-yellow compo-
nent, which bleaches at the highest electrochemical potential. 
The GMO blend exhibits the lowest Eclear of the blends, which 
is not surprising, as it comprises the three ECPs with the 
lowest Eclear values. When evaluating the kinetics of the black-
to-transmissive transition, the CMO and GMO exhibit similar 
switching times when stepped between -0.5 and +0.8 V and 
can complete a full transition in 2 s, as shown in Figure S5 in 
the Supporting Information. The CMY blend exhibits slightly 
slower switching kinetics using this same potential step, most 
likely due to high oxidation potential of ECP-yellow, which has 
been previously observed for brown ECP blends.[29]
To evaluate the functional lifetimes of the CMY, CMO, and 
GMO blends, each film was repeatedly stepped between the 
colored (-0.5 V) and colorless (+0.8 V) state 1000 times. After 
≈100 switches, the CMY blend lost almost 10% of its overall inte-
grated contrast (Figure S6, Supporting Information). This loss 
in contrast is attributed to the electrochemical instability of the 
ECP-yellow component, which has been demonstrated in pre-
vious work.[34] As shown in Figure S7 in the Supporting Infor-
mation, the b* value of the CMY blend decreased from about 
-1.5 to -17 over 1000 switches, corresponding to a loss in yellow 
chromaticity and increased blue coloration. By substituting 
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
Figure 4.  Photographs of A) ECP-black, B) the CMY blend, C) the CMO blend, and the D) GMO blend taken under potentiostatic control. Each  
photograph is taken at 0.1 V increments, increasing from 0 V to +0.8 V versus Ag/Ag+ in 0.5 M TBAPF6-PC. E) The corresponding color coordinates 
for ECP-black and the various blends at 0.1 V increments.
Table 3.  Electrochromic and electrochemical properties of black blends 
and ECP-black. All potentials are reported versus Fc/Fc+ couple.
ECP-black
CMY blend CMO blend GMO blend
%T (+0.8 V)
61
51
56
57
%T (0.0 V)
21
11
12
17
Integrated contrast (%)
40
40
45
40
Eonset (V)
+0.02
+0.08
+0.08
+0.09 V
Eclear (V)
+0.5
+0.7
+0.6
+0.5
Charge to switch (mC cm−2)
3.3
4.1
3.6
3.7
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (7 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
ECP-yellow for ECP-orange in the CMO and GMO blends, the 
switching stability can be greatly improved, as ECP-orange is 
able to maintain its full optical contrast over 1000 redox cycles 
(Figure  S8, Supporting Information). Over the course of 1000 
switches, the CMO and GMO blends exhibit minimal change 
in overall chromaticity and remain relatively color neutral 
(Figure  S9, Supporting Information), demonstrating that both 
the CMO and the GMO are robust electrochromic systems.
2.2. Transitional Coloration
By incorporating ECPs with a diverse set of redox properties 
and coloration kinetics, solution coprocessing offers the unique 
possibility of directly controlling the chromaticity of the optical 
evolution. In certain applications, such as for windows or eye-
wear, it is desirable to be able to access color-neutral interme-
diate shades. For other uses, such as on–off displays or optical 
shutters, it is more important that the switch between the 
extreme states occurs rapidly and with little detectable transient 
chromaticity. Following this motivation, both the intermediate 
and transient optical properties of the ECP films were studied.
To study their intermediate chromaticity, the ECP films were 
incrementally oxidized in 0.1 V steps ranging from 0.0 V (black 
state) to +0.8 V (transmissive state). At each potential, the visual 
appearance (Figure  4A), CIELAB coloration (Figure  4B), and 
spectral composition (Figure  S10, Supporting Information) 
were evaluated. In doing this, we evaluate which colors between 
the extreme states can be “dialed in” under intermediate poten-
tiostatic conditions. As shown in Figure 4A, ECP-black transi-
tions from a blue–purple color to a transmissive state through 
light blue intermediates. The color coordinates associated with 
this process maintain low a* and b* values throughout the tran-
sition as shown in Figure  4E. In the case of the CMY blend 
(Figure 4B), the Eclear mismatch between ECP-cyan, -magenta, 
and -yellow results in vibrantly colored intermediate states. At 
+0.2 V, ECP-magenta has reached a fairly colorless state, while 
ECP-cyan and ECP-yellow remain fully colored, as evidenced by 
the strong absorptions bands below 500 nm and above 600 nm 
in the potential-dependent spectra (Figure S9, Supporting Infor-
mation). This residual absorption results in the film exhibiting 
intermediate shades of green with (a*, b*) values that deviate 
greatly from the achromatic origin of the CIELAB color space 
(Figure 4E). Above +0.6 V, ECP-cyan is oxidized to its transmis-
sive state, leaving ECP-yellow as the only colored component 
remaining in the film until it finally bleaches at +0.8 V. Simi-
larly, the CMO blend undergoes a strongly colored optical evolu-
tion from the black to the transmissive state. In the CMO blend 
(Figure  4C), ECP-magenta and ECP-orange are oxidized to a 
transmissive state within a narrow potential window whereas 
ECP-cyan remains colored until +0.6 V, giving rise to a vibrant 
cyan intermediate state with L*  = 66, a*  = -16, and b*  = 7 
(C*ab = 17.5) between +0.4 and +0.5 V. ECP-green, on the other 
hand, having a lower Eonset and Eclear than ECP-cyan, reaches 
its colorless state at a potential that more closely aligns with 
the Eclear of ECP-magenta and ECP-orange. Matching the Eclear 
of each ECP component in the GMO blend results in a more 
concerted bleaching process and a more color-neutral optical 
evolution. While the color of the GMO film appears slightly  
green at +0.3 V (L* = 55 a* = -16, b* = 7, C*ab = 17.5), the overall 
transition is not nearly as vibrant as the CMY or CMO blends 
because of the lower L*. The reason for the residual green hue 
at +0.3 V is that ECP-magenta (Figure S2, Supporting Informa-
tion), unlike ECP-green, switches from a vibrantly colored state 
to a fairly clear state within a narrow potential window, rather 
than gradually bleaching out as the oxidation process pro-
gresses. This result demonstrates that measuring and reporting 
Eclear is perhaps even more important than the Eonset especially 
when developing ECP blends. Because each component in the 
GMO blend has a relatively low Eclear, this formulation reaches 
a fully transmissive state at +0.5 V, which is much lower than 
the potentials required to reach similar optical states in the 
CMY and CMO blends (Table 3).
When switching the blend films rapidly between the 
reduced and oxidized states (on/off switching), there may 
also be detectable transitional colors as the film evolves from 
its extreme black and transmissive states. This transient col-
oration is determined by not only the redox potentials of each 
component, but also by the kinetic factors associated with the 
bleaching of each chromophore. To evaluate the nature of the 
transitional colors when switching between black and trans-
missive states, a square wave bias of -0.5 V to +0.8 V was 
applied to the CMO and GMO films and spectra were recorded 
every 0.1 s to capture the nature of the direct optical evolution 
from the black to the transmissive state. For both the CMO 
and GMO blends, the first 0.4 s after oxidation is associated 
with a drastic decrease in the absorbance in the mid-range of 
the visible spectrum (500–550 nm), as shown in Figure 5A, as 
a result of the rapid bleaching of ECP-magenta. In the later 
stages of bleaching, contributions from ECP-cyan and ECP-
orange dominate the spectra of the CMO blend. Because the 
high-energy band of ECP-cyan does not overlap much with 
the absorbance of ECP-orange, the combined absorbance of 
these components results in rather even coverage of the visible 
spectrum in the later stages (0.5–1.0 s) of the optical evolution. 
This is illustrated by the colored rectangles in Figure 5, which 
show the spacing of the ECP-cyan and ECP-orange absorb-
ance bands during the transitional coloration. Because the 
high-energy absorbance band of ECP-green is redshifted with 
respect to that of ECP-cyan, the absorption band of ECP-green 
has a greater overlap with ECP-orange. This can be seen sche-
matically in Figure 5B from 420 to 490 nm, highlighted by the 
green and orange bars. As a result of this overlap, the spectral 
evolution assumes a distinct, uneven curvature with reduced 
absorbance around 500 nm, which indicates that the GMO 
blend bleaches through slightly green-tinted shades when tran-
sitioning directly from the black state. The reduced overlap of 
these bands in the CMO blend results in a more color-neutral 
optical evolution from the black to the transmissive state. Once 
ECP-magenta has reached a colorless state in the GMO blend, 
the remaining transition is characterized by the bleaching of 
ECP-green and ECP-orange.
While the intermediate coloration of the GMO blend appears 
the most color-neutral when applying intermediate electro-
chemical potentials (Figure 4), here we can see that the GMO 
black-to-transmissive evolution is slightly more colored than 
that of the CMO blend when switching in an on/off fashion 
between extreme potentials. Therefore, a blend similar to 
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (8 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
GMO, where the oxidation potentials are more closely aligned, 
would be superior for applications in which intermediate ach-
romatic shades need to be accessed or dialed in, or when a 
lower driving voltage is required. On the other hand, in applica-
tions where direct black-to-transmissive transition must exhibit 
minimal transient coloration, a blend with components whose 
absorbance bands are spaced further apart, such as the CMO 
blend, would be more advantageous. The broadened absorb-
ance spectrum can compensate for disparities in the bleaching 
and coloration of each component.
For truly color-neutral black-to-transmissive switching, the 
coloration and bleaching kinetics of each chromophore should 
be similar so that the transition between extreme occurs 
through achromatic, evenly absorbing intermediate shades. 
However, factors that govern kinetic characteristics are com-
plex, as they involve migration of both charge carriers and 
solvated ions that must occur simultaneously and, as a result, 
may depend on electrolyte properties and the microstructure of 
the polymer film. Therefore, it is difficult to predictably tune 
the switching kinetics through structural modifications of the 
polymer. In ECP blend formulations where one component 
bleaches at a faster rate than the others (namely, the ECP-
magenta component in the CMO and GMO blends), it appears 
to be advantageous if the chromophores exhibit little spectral 
overlap, thereby allowing for more even coverage across the vis-
ible spectrum throughout the optical transition.
3. Conclusion
Using five vibrant colored-to-colorless dioxythiophene-based 
polymers and following straightforward color-mixing principles, 
we have developed new electrochromic polymer blends that 
reversibly switch between highly desirable black and transmis-
sive states and can be tuned for achromatic optical transitions. 
These blends include a conventional CMY subtractive combina-
tion (ECP-cyan, -magenta, and -yellow), as well as CMO (ECP-
cyan, -magenta, and -orange), and GMO (ECP-green, -magenta, 
and -orange) formulations. Combining the constituent ECPs 
through scalable solution co-processing techniques allows us 
to control the precise ratio of the chromophores, predictably 
balance the chromatic contributions of each component, and 
access achromatic states (C*ab  < 5) that absorb more broadly 
across the visible spectrum than previously reported single- 
component donor-acceptor black-to-clear ECPs. By substituting 
the new ECP-orange for ECP-yellow in the CMO and GMO 
blends, we can overcome the stability issues associated with 
the high gap component and produce blends that maintain col-
oration over hundreds of redox cycles without compromising 
electrochromic contrast. Owing to the low oxidation potential  
of ProDOT-rich ECP-green, the GMO blend reaches a transmis-
sive state at a lower potential than the CMO blend (+0.5 com-
pared to +0.6 V vs Fc/Fc+), exhibits more coordinated bleaching 
of the constituent chromophores, and transitions through low 
(a*, b*) achromatic intermediates. Utilizing ECP-cyan, which 
has an inherently broadened absorption spectrum when com-
pared to ECP-green, allows the CMO blend to exhibit more color 
neutral on/off switching between its extreme black and trans-
missive states. To achieve truly achromatic and synchronized  
switching of blended electrochromic materials, such as those 
described in this study, additional work is needed to understand 
the kinetic factors associate with ECP coloration and bleaching.
4. Experimental Section
Materials: ECP-black was synthesized with Stille coupling according to 
a previously published procedure[16] (Mn: 10 kDa; ÐM: 1.6). ECP-magenta 
(direct (hetero)arylation polymerization, Mn: 11.5 kDa, ÐM: 2.3), ECP-
cyan (direct (hetero)arylation polymerization, Mn: 19.8 kDa, ÐM: 4.3), 
ECP-yellow (direct (hetero)arylation polymerization, Mn: 88 kDa, ÐM: 
3.9) were synthesized using previously reported procedures.[29,35] ECP-
green and ECP-orange were also synthesized using direct (hetero)
arylation polymerization. Synthetic conditions and characterization for 
these polymers can be found in the Supporting Information.
To fabricate ECP films, all polymers were dissolved at 2 mg mL−1 in 
toluene and spray cast at 20 PSI onto indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated 
glass slides (Delta Technologies, 8–12 Ω sq−1) to an optical density of 
1 ± 0.1 a.u. using an Iwata Eclipse spray gun. To formulate ECP blends, 
solutions of each ECP (2 mg mL−1 in toluene) were combined in the 
reported ratios (based on solution volume and therefore mass) and 
spray cast using the same tools. Optical and redox properties were 
evaluated in 0.5 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophophate (TBAPF6, 
Acros Organics, 98%, purified by recrystallization from hot ethanol) in 
propylene carbonate (PC, Acros organics, 99.5%).
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
Figure 5.  Spectral evolution of A) CMO blend and B) GMO blend when applying a square wave potential from -0.5 V to +0.8 V (vs Ag/Ag+) in 0.5 M 
TBAPF6/PC. The black line represents the absorption spectra of the films in the reduced state at the time of the pulse, while the lightest gray line 
represents the spectra 1.5 s after applying the square wave. Spectra was recorded every 100 ms. Superimposed on the spectra are colored bands 
corresponding to the absorption maxima and full width at 75% peak maximum of the individual ECP components: ECP-cyan (cyan rectangles), ECP-
magenta-2 (pink rectangles), ECP-orange (orange rectangles), and ECP-green (green rectangles).
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800594  (9 of 9)
www.advopticalmat.de
Adv. Optical Mater. 2018, 6, 1800594
Electrochemical and Optical Characterization: Spectroscopic, kinetic, 
and spectroelectrochemical measurements (integrated contrast, Eclear, 
charge to switch) were performed in a three-electrode cell with a 
platinum flag as the counter electrode, an Ag/Ag+ reference electrode 
(10 × 10−3  M AgNO3 in 0.5 M TBAPF6 (acetonitrile), E½ for Fc/Fc+ 
couple: +0.065 V), and ECP-coated ITO as the working electrode. The 
current and voltage were controlled and measured using an EG&G PAR 
273A potentiostat/galvanostat under CorrWare control.
For electrochemical characterization, all films were evaluated by cyclic 
voltammetry (CV, -0.5 V and +0.8 V at 0.050 V s−1) and DPV using a 
three-electrode cell with a Pt flag as the counter electrode, an Ag/Ag+ 
reference electrode (10 × 10−3  M AgNO3 in 0.5 M TBAPF6-ACN, E½ 
for Fc/Fc+ couple: +0.065 V), and ECP-coated glass carbon working 
electrode. For these electrochemical measurements, 2 µL of ECP stock 
solution (2  mg  mL−1) were dropcasted on the glassy carbon working 
electrode (area = 0.07 cm2) and allowed to dry at room temperature to 
form a thin film.
The in situ spectroscopic analyses were performed with an Ocean 
Optics USB2000+ fiber-optic spectrophotometer. The colors of the ECP 
films were quantified by converting the absorbance spectra to CIELAB 
(L*, a*, b*) color coordinates where the L* represents the white–black 
balance, a* the green-red balance, and b* the blue–yellow balance of 
the color. The photography was performed in a light booth with D50 
illumination using a Nikon D90 SLR camera with a Nikon 18–105 mm 
VR lens. The photographs were reported without any manipulation apart 
from photograph cropping. For stability studies, ITO was pretreated 
with hexylphosphonic acid (10 × 10−3  M in ethanol) to prevent film 
delamination, and film characterization was performed in degassed 
electrolyte solution under an argon blanket.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or 
from the author.
Acknowledgements
This material was based upon work supported by the National Science 
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-
1650044 (L.R.S.). The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from 
NXN Licensing and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant 
FA9550−18−1−0184).
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare the following competing financial interest(s): 
Electrochromic polymer technology developed at the Georgia Institute 
of Technology has been licensed to NXN Licensing. J.R.R., A.M.O., and 
D.E.S. served as consultants to NXN Licensing.
Keywords
black electrochromism, color mixing, electrochromic polymers
Received: May 5, 2018
Revised: June 6, 2018
Published online: July 1, 2018
[1]	 D. E.  Shen, A. M.  Österholm, J. R.  Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. C 
2015, 3, 9715.
[2]	 P.-H. Aubert, A. A. Argun, A. Cirpan, D. B. Tanner, J. R. Reynolds, 
Chem. Mater. 2004, 16, 2386.
[3]	 J. Jensen, H. F. Dam, J. R. Reynolds, A. L. Dyer, F. C. Krebs, J. Polym. 
Sci. 2012, 50, 536.
[4]	 A. M. Österholm, D. E. Shen, D. S. Gottfried, J. R. Reynolds, Adv. 
Mater. Technol. 2016, 1, 1600063.
[5]	 J. Jensen, F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 7231.
[6]	 A. L.  Dyer, E. J.  Thompson, J. R.  Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2011, 3, 1787.
[7]	 P. Andersson, D. Nilsson, P. O. Svensson, M. Chen, A. Malmström, 
T. Remonen, T. Kugler, M. Berggren, Adv. Mater. 2002, 14, 1460.
[8]	 P. Andersson, R. Forchheimer, P. Tehrani, M. Berggren, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2007, 17, 3074.
[9]	 L. Gomes, A. Branco, T. Moreira, F. Feliciano, C. Pinheiro, C. Costa, 
Sol. Energy Mater Sol. Cells 2016, 144, 631.
[10]	 J. Padilla, A. M. Österholm, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds, Sol. Energy 
Mater Sol. Cells 2015, 140, 54.
[11]	 C.  Pozo-Gonzalo, D.  Mecerreyes, J. A.  Pomposo, M.  Salsamendi, 
R. Marcilla, H. Grande, R. Vergaz, D. Barrios, J. M. Sánchez-Pena, 
Sol. Energy Mater Sol. Cells 2008, 92, 101.
[12]	 A. A. Argun, A. Cirpan, J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater. 2003, 15, 1338.
[13]	 A.  Malti, R.  Brooke, X.  Liu, D.  Zhao, P. A.  Ersman, M.  Fahlman, 
M. P. Jonsson, M. Berggren, X. Crispin, J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4, 
9680.
[14]	 P. Tehrani, L.-O. Hennerdal, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds, M. Berggren, 
J. Mater. Chem. 2009, 19, 1799.
[15]	 P. M. Beaujuge, S. Ellinger, J. R. Reynolds, Nat. Mater. 2008, 7, 795.
[16]	 P. Shi, C. M. Amb, E. P. Knott, E. J. Thompson, D. Y. Liu, J. Mei, 
A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 4949.
[17]	 W. T. Neo, C. M. Cho, Z. Shi, S.-J. Chua, J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C 
2016, 4, 28.
[18]	 M.  Içli, M.  Pamuk, F.  Algı, A. M.  Önal, A.  Cihaner, Org. Electron. 
2010, 11, 1255.
[19]	 K.-R. Lee, G. A. Sotzing, ChemComm 2013, 49, 5192.
[20]	 G.  Öktem, A.  Balan, D.  Baran, L.  Toppare, ChemComm 2011, 47, 
3933.
[21]	 C.-Y. Hsu, J. Zhang, T. Sato, S. Moriyama, M. Higuchi, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 18266.
[22]	 M.  Sassi, M. M.  Salamone, R.  Ruffo, G. E.  Patriarca, C. M.  Mari, 
G. A. Pagani, U. Posset, L. Beverina, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2016, 26, 5240.
[23]	 H.-S. Liu, B.-C. Pan, D.-C. Huang, Y.-R. Kung, C.-M. Leu, G.-S. Liou, 
NPG Asia Mater. 2017, 1.
[24]	 G. Sonmez, H. B. Sonmez, C. K. F. Shen, F. Wudl, Adv. Mater. 2004, 
16, 1905.
[25]	 E.  Unur, P. M.  Beaujuge, S.  Ellinger, J.-H.  Jung, J. R.  Reynolds, 
Chem. Mater. 2009, 21, 5145.
[26]	 S. V. Vasilyeva, J. R. Reynolds, P. M. Beaujuge, S. Wang, J. E. Babiarz, 
V. W. Ballarotto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2011, 3, 1022.
[27]	 H. Shin, X. Yang, Y. Kim, T. Bhuvana, J. Lee, C. Park, E. Kim, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2012, 4, 185.
[28]	 Z. Xu, W. Wang, J. Wu, S. Mi, J. Zheng, C. Xu, New J. Chem. 2016, 
40, 5231.
[29]	 A. M.  Österholm, D. E.  Shen, J. A.  Kerszulis, R. H.  Bulloch, 
M. Kuepfert, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015, 7, 1413.
[30]	 G. Wyszecki, W. S. Stiles, Color Science: Concepts and Methods, Quan-
titative Data and Formulae, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY,  1982.
[31]	 Fea Hex Color Information Coca-Cola Red 2011, can be found under 
http://www.Spycolor.com/fe001a.
[32]	 P. M. Beaujuge, S. V. Vasilyeva, D. Y. Liu, S. Ellinger, T. D. McCarley, 
J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater. 2012, 24, 255.
[33]	 J.  Schanda, in Colorimetry Understanding the CIE System (Ed.: 
J. Schanda), John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ 2007, pp. 25–78.
[34]	 K. Cao, D. E. Shen, A. M. Österholm, J. A. Kerszulis, J. R. Reynolds, 
Macromolecules 2016, 49, 8498.
[35]	 J. A. Kerszulis, K. E. Johnson, M. Kuepfert, D. Khoshabo, A. L. Dyer, 
J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. C 2015, 3, 3211.
 21951071, 2018, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adom.201800594 by Argonne National Laboratory, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

