Article
Electrostatic self-assembly yields a structurally
stabilized PEDOT:PSS with efﬁcient mixed
transport and high-performance OECTs
We achieve state-of-the-art organic electrochemical transistors (mC* = 752.5
F/cmVs) in aqueous environments thanks to PEDOT:PSS with superior crystalline
order and high porosity formed via electrostatic self-assembly. The resulting
PEDOT:PSS is structurally and operationally stable in wet environments without
crosslinkers and both interacts with ions and conducts electricity very efﬁciently.
Electrostatic self-assembly forms interconnected ﬁbrils in solution with a co-
crystalline phase that structurally embeds PSS without disrupting electronic
transport, making this soft material ideal for bioelectronic applications and
beyond.
Laine Taussig, Masoud
Ghasemi, Sanggil Han, ...,
George G. Malliaras, Enrique D.
Gomez, Aram Amassian
gm603@cam.ac.uk (G.G.M.)
edg12@psu.edu (E.D.G.)
aamassi@ncsu.edu (A.A.)
Highlights
PEDOT:PSS is structurally
stabilized in wet environments
without crosslinkers
OECTs with state-of-the-art mC* =
752.5 F/cmVs in aqueous
environments
Hierarchical PEDOT:PSS with PSS
embedded within co-crystal
explains stability
Achieved by electrostatic self-
assembly in solution using
common ionic salts and aging
Taussig et al., Matter 7, 1071–1091
March 6, 2024 ª 2023 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2023.12.021
ll

Article
Electrostatic self-assembly yields a structurally stabilized
PEDOT:PSS with efﬁcient mixed
transport and high-performance OECTs
Laine Taussig,1,5,7 Masoud Ghasemi,1,4,5,7 Sanggil Han,2,6 Albert L. Kwansa,1 Ruipeng Li,3
Scott T. Keene,2 Nathan Woodward,1,5 Yaroslava G. Yingling,1 George G. Malliaras,2,*
Enrique D. Gomez,4,* and Aram Amassian1,5,8,*
SUMMARY
Organic electronics and organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs)
are gaining importance for their potential to replicate complex biolog-
ical processes of the human brain. Such devices require polymeric ma-
terials to efﬁciently transport and couple ionic and electronic charges in
aqueousmedia,thereforedemandingwater-insolublesystemscapable
of efﬁcient electronic and ionic conductions. This has created a funda-
mental stability-performance compromise for water-soluble con-
ducting polymers such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polysty-
rene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), whereby stability has been achieved at
the expense of electronic properties. Here, we demonstrate a break-
through in structural stabilization of PEDOT:PSS through electrostatic
self-assembly (ESA) that leads to the formation of an efﬁcient mixed
conductor in a hydrated state. Beneﬁting from the multiscale
morphology control provided by ESA, PEDOT:PSS mixed conductors
exhibitsuperiorcarrier mobility andhigh volumetriccapacitance result-
ing in a state-of-the-art thin-ﬁlm OECT ﬁgure of merit (mC* = 752.5
F/cmVs) in aqueous media, making this approach suitable for creating
robust mixed conductors for bioelectronic applications and beyond.
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in bioelectronics are pushing the boundary between electronics and
biological matter, enabling quantitative investigations of ion transmission and chemical
signals to understand the complexities of neuron function in the brain.1 Conjugated
polymers have been particularly successful in bioelectronics by leveraging ﬂexible
and compliant mechanical properties and mixed ionic/electronic conductivity to seam-
lessly interface with living tissues.2 Leveraging the electronic-ionic charge interaction of
conducting polymers,3 organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) have emerged as
one of the most successful bioelectronic platforms for neural recording, sensing, and
bioinspired neuromorphic computing.2 OECTs consist of a conducting polymer chan-
nel that is in direct contact with an electrolyte. In the presence of gate bias, ions pene-
trate the bulk of the channel and electrochemically modulate the current at relatively
low operating voltages compared to other bioelectronic devices.4
Over the last decade, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate
(PEDOT:PSS) has become the channel material of choice in OECTs used in organic
bioelectronics,5 including implantable and on-skin wearable devices,6–8 brain
mimicking neuromorphic devices,9 and environmental sensors deployed in harsh
PROGRESS AND POTENTIAL
A structurally stable form of the
biocompatible mixed conductor
PEDOT:PSS has been developed
that can operate efﬁciently in wet
environments without
crosslinkers, making it ideally
suited for bioelectronic
applications. This material both
conducts electricity and interacts
with ions very efﬁciently and
achieves state-of-the-art organic
electrochemical transistors.
Absence of crosslinkers allows
PEDOT:PSS to achieve superior
crystalline order, carrier mobility,
and volumetric capacitance. The
material’s structure is developed
in solution via electrostatic self-
assembly, and its multiscale
hierarchy includes a co-crystalline
phase that structurally embeds
PSS and helps preserve the
material’s structural integrity and
mixed conductivity in wet
environments. Given that
PEDOT:PSS is transparent,
ﬂexible, stretchable, and
conductive, the range of potential
applications of this durable
PEDOT:PSS likely extends well
beyond the biomedical sector.
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 ª 2023 Elsevier Inc. 1071
ll

conditions.4 OECTs employ mixed transport of electrons/holes and ions through the
channel material, therefore requiring precise engineering of the PEDOT:PSS
morphology to optimize ion permeation and ion-to-electron coupling while simulta-
neously maintaining highly ordered and percolated conjugated moieties for facile
charge transport.4,10–13 However, progress in the use of PEDOT:PSS in bio-
electronics has been hampered by a fundamental limitation of PEDOT:PSS, namely
its susceptibility to water. The most common stabilization approach consists of the
addition of crosslinkers,13,14 like (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane (GOPS);
however, this comes at considerable cost to carrier mobility14 and volumetric capac-
itance,4,15,16 as crosslinking disrupts crystalline order and reduces free volume. The
performance of OECTs targeted for in vivo, on-skin, and biomimetic neuromorphic
applications is therefore considerably lower than what is needed and what is theo-
retically achievable had PEDOT:PSS been intrinsically water stable. Another
approach seeks to remove PSS via post-processing, such as acid washes,4 which
render PEDOT:PSS incompatible with biological media.17
To overcome this fundamental stability-performance compromise, the organic bio-
electronics community has started to look beyond PEDOT:PSS at novel synthetic ma-
terials commonly soluble in hydrocarbon solvents.18–20 Alternatively, recent work also
shows that extraction of PSS using multi-step post-treatment with sulfuric acid can suc-
cessfully stabilize PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms in water and achieve highly performing thin-ﬁlm
OECTs.4 Pushing this approach further, strain-engineered PEDOT ﬁbrils can be
extruded to make state-of-the-art OECTs21 while achieving high free volume and or-
der required for high carrier mobility. We sought to take a considerably simpler
approach that leverages the electrostatic control of PEDOT:PSS colloids in water to
self-assemble an intrinsically water-stable form of PEDOT:PSS that is ordered, ﬁbrillar,
and promotes mixed transport. A handful of historical reports have suggested and/or
predicted that PEDOT and PSS can form bicomponent or co-crystalline struc-
tures.22–25 Achieving structural docking of the long-chain soluble PSS within PEDOT
crystals may be a promising path to achieving efﬁcient mixed conduction in aqueous
media. We take inspiration from an emerging body of work showing how ionic addi-
tives interact electrostatically with the PEDOT and PSS components to modify the in-
ternal structure of PEDOT:PSS colloidal suspensions and to increase the conductivity
of PEDOT:PSS by over three orders of magnitude26 while also improving mechanical
ﬂexibility,27 thermal stability,28 and electrochemical properties.29 Evidence of electro-
static interactions is indicated by reports of gelation behavior30 and coalescence of
colloidal PEDOT:PSS,31 even resulting in the fabrication of conducting hydrogels.32–34
Here, we show how careful electrostatic manipulation of PEDOT:PSS colloidal solutions
via electrostatic self-assembly (ESA) can lead to hierarchical solid-state structures with
remarkable mixed conduction in aqueous media. ESA is controlled with ionic additives
through time-dependent processing in which co-crystalline phases of PEDOT:PSS
gradually assemble to form interconnected ﬁbril networks to produce a water-insoluble
structure with enhanced mixed ionic-electronic transport ideal for high-performance
OECTs. A combination of advanced electron microscopies, advanced X-ray scattering,
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and electrical characterizations shed light on the
complex self-assembly and ordering within PEDOT:PSS solutions and thin ﬁlms. Our
study demonstrates with unprecedented detail the formation of the hierarchical struc-
ture, initiated in the solution phase, creating an interconnected conducting network of
a PEDOT:PSS scaffold that maintains electrical conductivity both in dry and aqueous
environments. Interestingly, these attractive properties are not attributed solely to
the crystallization of PEDOT:PSS components, nor to the presence of ionic salts in
the solid state but are accredited to the multiscale and hierarchical order composed
1Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
2Electrical Engineering Division, Department of
Engineering, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
3National Synchrotron Light Source II,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY
11973, USA
4Department of Chemical Engineering and
Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA
5Organic and Carbon Electronics Laboratories,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27606, USA
6Department of Nano-Bioengineering, Incheon
National University, Incheon 22012, Republic of
Korea
7These authors contributed equally
8Lead contact
*Correspondence: gm603@cam.ac.uk (G.G.M.),
edg12@psu.edu (E.D.G.),
aamassi@ncsu.edu (A.A.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2023.12.021
ll
1072 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

of nanoscale PEDOT:PSS crystalline features interconnected across a microscale net-
worked morphology. Ionic additives act as self-assembly aids by altering the colloidal
self-assembly, but they do not participate in electrical transport and are easily removed
by rinsing in deionized water without compromising water stability or electrical conduc-
tivity. This renders the process and materials ideal for biological applications. Intrinsi-
cally water-stable PEDOT:PSS is tested in OECT devices using single-step processing
without traditional additives or chemical crosslinkers. We demonstrate excellent OECT
devices using ESA-processed PEDOT:PSS (mC* = 471.6 F/cmVs) that are further
enhanced with facile solution aging to produce a record ﬁgure of merit (mC* = 752.5
F/cmVs) achieved to date in solution-processed thin ﬁlms. This study sheds light on
the electrostatic modulation of colloidal PEDOT:PSS to achieve directed hierarchical
self-assembly of PEDOT:PSS that is intrinsically water stable, enabling high-perfor-
mance OECTs in aqueous environments for bioelectronic, biomimetic, wearable,
and environmental sensing applications. In the future, the simplicity of the ESA
approach could allow existing commercially available water-based PEDOT:PSS sus-
pensions to be processed into stable ﬁlms for a wide range of applications in harsh en-
vironments, including biological, wearable, and environmental applications.
RESULTS
Colloidal electrostatic self-assembly of PEDOT:PSS
In developing the ESA approach for PEDOT:PSS, we highlight lithium bis(triﬂuorome-
thanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) as a high performing salt additive capable of signiﬁcantly
enhancing OECT performance; however, we observe ESA in multiple ionic additives
(see supplementary information, section 1). The chemical structures of PEDOT:PSS
and Li-TFSI ionic salt are shown in Figure 1A. We ﬁrst examined the colloidal self-as-
sembly of solution-phase PEDOT:PSS upon the addition of Li-TFSI and the resulting
effects on microstructure and solution properties. Interestingly, the solution properties
were observed to evolve over time as shown by the evolution of viscosity and resis-
tance of aqueous PEDOT:PSS (Figure 1B). A concentration of 40 wt % Li-TFSI was
added to a commercially available PEDOT:PSS (PH1000), and the solution was vigor-
ously mixed for 2 min and then stored and allowed to ‘‘age,’’ with no additional dis-
turbances, up to 4 days. The solution viscosity, measured with a rotational viscometer,
shows a rapid increase within the ﬁrst 12 h, followed by a slow and steady increase. The
solution’s electrical resistance, measured using a 4-point probe method in a constant
volume, displays a mirrored time-dependent relationship with decreasing resistance
from time 0 to 4 days (Figure S4). These time-dependent features suggest a complex
multiscale self-assembly of the core-shell colloids in solution with the addition of Li-
TFSI causing polymer chains to extend and entangle, resulting in increased viscos-
ity35,36 and the formation of percolation pathways.
We evaluate the effects of ionic additives on the structure and conformation of
PEDOT:PSS aqueous colloidal suspensions by employing MD simulations and ﬁnd
evidence of electrostatic destabilization. Radial distribution function (RDF) gA-B(r)
is used to calculate the distribution of distance between the atoms of neighboring
molecules (A and B); in this case, distances between polymer-polymer and
polymer-ion are measured to further understand the organization of the systems.
The conformation of polymer components was evaluated by calculating the end-
to-end distance of chains in the system and compared to the maximum length of
a fully extended chain. It is important to note that simulations represent
experimental time 0 for Li-TFSI addition to PEDOT:PSS, as the aging phenomena
is outside the scope of MD capabilities due to the computational resources required
(see the supplemental information for MD speciﬁcations).
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1073
Article

Upon reaching equilibrium, the MD snapshot image of neat PEDOT:PSS (Figure 1D)
portrays a structure resembling the well-known core-shell architecture31 consisting
of conducting PEDOT chains (red) concentrated in the center surrounded by
Figure 1. Electrostatic self-assembly and gelation of PEDOT:PSS in presence of ionic additives
(A) The chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS and Li-TFSI salt.
(B) Viscosity and electrical resistance of PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solution with 40 wt % Li-TFSI as a function of time.
(C) A picture taken from three PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solutions at different aging times in vials to reveal effects of aging on viscosity and ﬂow behavior.
(D and E) MD simulations of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI including snapshots at equilibrium, schematics of RDF analysis with annotated ﬁrst
peak position of polymer and additives with PEDOT at the center, and average PSS end-to-end distance.
(F) Density distribution of PEDOT components along z axis of computational box for neat PEDOT:PSS (blue) and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI (orange)
simulations.
(G) Schematic of cryogenic sample preparation by vitriﬁcation and blotting of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solutions.
(H) Cryo-EM images of PEDOT:PSS.
(I and J) Cryo-EM images of solutions of PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI aged for 12 h and 4 days, respectively. The higher density of ﬁbers observed in aged salt
solutions compared to neat PEDOT:PSS and the increase in ﬁbral density as a function of aging time in (H)–(J) are consistent with the decrease in
electrical resistance and increase in viscosity of salt solutions in (B). Inset of (H)–(J): schematic showing the electrostatic destabilization effects of salt
addition to PEDOT:PSS core-shell colloids and proposed conformational changes from core-shell structure to an elongated structure, leading to salt-
mediated colloidal self-assembly of long-chain PSS (green) and short chain PEDOT (red) into an interconnected network of aggregates, which manifest
macroscopically into gelation and electrical conductivity of the solution.
ll
1074 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

insulating PSS chains (green). The addition of ionic salt is observed to alter the sys-
tem to a more elongated structure with PEDOT components more uniformly
distributed within PSS (Figure 1E). This observation is conﬁrmed by calculating
the density distribution of PEDOT throughout the computational box volume
(Figure 1F), which shows a disproportionately large density of PEDOT (81.8%)
concentrated within a small volume, whereas addition of Li-TFSI leads to a more
uniformly distributed PEDOT. This is accompanied by an extension of the long-
chain PSS molecules, as the average length of PSS chains increases from 20.4 A˚
in the neat system to 28.0 A˚ with the addition of Li-TFSI, compared to 40 A˚ for
a fully extended theoretical PSS chain (n = 18). The elongation of PSS chains likely
assists in the closer packing of components as is determined by calculating gA-B(r)
(Figures 1D and 1E). Most notably, the average distance between PEDOT and PSS
components decreases from 10.15 A˚ (neat) to 7.45 A˚ (Li-TFSI), signifying reorgani-
zation and closer packing of PEDOT and PSS. This observation is counter to prior
claims of charge screening-induced separation of PEDOT and PSS, but as we will
show, it is central to the formation of co-crystalline phases of PEDOT and PSS
that will contribute to the intrinsic water stability of PEDOT:PSS. Interestingly,
the TFSI anion is located between the polymer components, approximately
5.55 A˚ from PEDOT, suggesting a disruption to the electrostatic interactions be-
tween PEDOT and PSS is at the origin of polymer reorganization and conformation
extension. Oppositely charged PSS and Li+ components are also in very close
proximity to each other (1.95 A˚ ), which is likely enabled by the small radius of
Li+. Overall, MD simulations point to evidence of electrostatic destabilization of
PEDOT:PSS colloidal suspensions leading to polymer structural and conformational
changes with the initial addition of ionic salt to PEDOT:PSS solution.
We clarify the mesoscale self-assembly of PEDOT:PSS solutions under the inﬂuence
of ionic additive by conducting cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) on
vitriﬁed solutions. Cryo-EM enables high-resolution structural imaging of aqueous
systems by carefully blotting a solution onto a grid with a pre-patterned carbon
layer and quickly quenching the sample in liquid ethane to form vitreous ice, pre-
serving the composition and structure37 (Figure 1G). cryo-EM images of neat
PEDOT:PSS solution (Figure 1H) and PEDOT:PSS with 40% Li-TFSI solution aged
12 h and 4 days (Figures 1I and 1J, respectively) reveal signiﬁcant changes in the
solution ﬁbril structure. Fibril formation in PEDOT:PSS has been previously dis-
cussed in the context of solid-state ﬁlms and shown to occur primarily during the
drying stage of solution processing with the use of additives and post-processing
techniques resulting in enhanced conductivity in thin ﬁlms.27,38,39 However, here it
is clear that ESA leads to ﬁbril formation in solution, and to our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst observation of ﬁbrillar structure, self-assembly process, and networking in
the solution phase for PEDOT:PSS. Neat PEDOT:PSS exhibits a granular texture
with short ﬁber-like structures that are disconnected and randomly dispersed
throughout the solution. The addition of Li-TFSI and subsequent aging reveal
well-deﬁned, elongated ﬁbers that become more deﬁned and networked as the so-
lution ages (Figures 1I and 1J), clearly explaining both trends in solution-phase
conductivity and viscosity. The resulting solution-thickening effect can be easily
visualized (Figure 1C). The multiscale structural changes observed as a function
of aging point to the hierarchical self-assembly and reorganization of PEDOT:PSS
in solution with addition of ionic additive.
Solution-phase hierarchical order
The molecular and nanoscale order resulting from solution phase ESA of PEDOT:PSS
is captured through small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and grazing incidence
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1075
Article

wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements on solutions. SAXS shows ev-
idence of long-range order with the addition of Li-TFSI (Figure S10). Pair (distance)
distribution functions, P(r), determined from SAXS data (see the supplemental infor-
mation for more details) show evidence of two peaks in the range 0–500 A˚ , consis-
tent with short-range order (Figure S10A) in intra-chain and inter-chain aggrega-
tion.40 Addition of Li-TFSI makes the inter-chain peak more pronounced and shifts
the correlation length to a larger R value, which is indicative of increases in the
size of the ordered domains and overall chain organization.41 Additional validation
of crystalline order within solution-phase PEDOT:PSS structures is obtained by con-
ducting in situ GIWAXS during solution casting and spin-coating (Figure S11). This
sensitive scattering method detects whether PEDOT:PSS crystallites are present in
the bulk solution during drying.39,42 Out-of-plane scattering proﬁles of neat
PEDOT:PSS and aged PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI (aged 4 days) solutions (Figure S12)
show existence of high q scattering haloes consistent with liquid water scattering.
Excessive water is present during the ﬁrst 20 s and diminishes as the substrate con-
tinues to spin and the water evaporates.42 As expected, we detect scattering fea-
tures at low q values for PEDOT:PSS with Li-TFSI during the ﬁrst 20 s, conﬁrming
the presence of crystalline phases and thereby aqueous ordering. Comparable mea-
surements on neat PEDOT:PSS reveal no evidence of crystalline order until after the
liquid water evaporates, while similar experiments conducted on DMSO-processed
PEDOT:PSS known to form ﬁbrils in the solid ﬁlms only show evidence of order upon
evaporation of water,39 highlighting the success of the ESA approach to self-
assemble and crystallize PEDOT:PSS in aqueous media. The observed diffraction
features are associated to the PEDOT:PSS lamellar structure, PEDOT-rich stacking,
and PSS stacking (qz  0.2, 0.85, and 1.3 A˚ 1, respectively),22,23,43,44 and all are pre-
sent in PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI, indicating the ESA approach forms solid-state crystalline
phase of PEDOT:PSS in aqueous media.
The ESA of PEDOT:PSS, leading to increased viscosity and a decrease in electrical
resistance of the solution, is schematically explained as follows (Figures 1H–1J,
inset): Neat PEDOT:PSS displays the well-known core-shell particle structure with
positively charged PEDOT chains sitting in the center of the colloid surrounded by
long-chain insulating PSS polymers.31,42,45–47 Neighboring particles in solution
experience electrostatic repulsion as excess negative charges from PSS surround
the exterior.31,48 The addition of ionic additives promotes charge screening mecha-
nisms that decrease electrostatic repulsions,22,26,49,50 enabling core-shell colloids to
coalesce. Additionally, electrostatic interactions between PEDOT and PSS compo-
nents are disrupted, as shown by MD simulation, and long-chain PSS polymers
extend and elongate to allow for intimate and uniform mixing of PEDOT and PSS
components (Figure 1I, inset). As the ionic-additive-containing solution ages, an in-
terconnected network of polymer ﬁbers containing PEDOT:PSS crystalline structures
are formed throughout the solution, inﬂuencing macroscopic solution properties
such as viscosity and electrical resistance (Figure 1J, inset). As will be shown below,
the solution-phase hierarchical self-assembly and structure are transferred to the
solid state and will contribute to thin-ﬁlm water stability, enhanced mixed transport,
and manipulation of thin-ﬁlm properties through time-dependent processing.
Solid-state hierarchical order
We compare and contrast water stability of neat and aged PEDOT:PSS by using a 3D
printer to dispense patterns (‘‘NCSU’’) on glass using partially dehydrated neat
PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI (4-day aged). Once placed in water, neat
PEDOT:PSS broke apart in approximately 15 min, while designs containing ionic ad-
ditive remained intact, stable, and insoluble in water even after several days of
ll
1076 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

immersion (Figure 2A). We investigate the dry thickness evolution vs. soaking time to
monitor the amount of solid loss using thin ﬁlms fabricated by spin-coating. Results
conﬁrm neat PEDOT:PSS thin ﬁlms disintegrate within 60 s (Figure 2B). ESA-pro-
cessed PEDOT:PSS, on the other hand, retains 80% of the initial thickness and re-
mains visually intact and undisturbed (Figure S14). We ascribe the 20% thickness
loss to excess PSS and salt, as will be shown below. We further conﬁrm the ESA-pro-
cessed samples are also functionally intact and water stable as they maintain their
electrical resistance over a 24-h period in an aqueous environment (Figure S15).
The composition of thin ﬁlms after water exposure was then explored, and we conﬁrm
that ESA-stabilized PEDOT:PSS retains the vast majority of PSS after water washing,
with a small amount of excess PSS being lost. The relative surface composition
(PSS:PEDOT) of ﬁlms before and after water exposure (120 s water exposure) was eval-
uated using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Figures 2B, inset, and S17) by
distinguishing between sulfur atoms associated with styrene sulfonate (S 2p from
171 to 167 eV) and thiophene (S 2p from 167 to 163 eV).51,52 The ratio of styrene:thio-
phene after washing in water declines from 1.9 to 1.5, indicating only a small fraction of
PSS is removed from the thin ﬁlm, much of which is likely excess amorphous PSS known
to reside at the surface of PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms. Concentration depth proﬁles of the Li-
TFSI additive were investigated for similar samples using time of ﬂight secondary
ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS or SIMS). Vertical concentration proﬁles throughout
the depth of the ﬁlm were collected in both positive and negative ion collection
modes, where time 0 represents the ﬁlm/air interface, and successive sputtering
time penetrates the depth of the ﬁlm. We evaluated that the relative counts of
elemental Li+ and F are representative of the Li-TFSI cation and anion, respectively
(Figures 2C and 2D). Referring to the neat ﬁlm as a control sample, the Li-TFSI ﬁlm con-
tains a signiﬁcant amount of anion (F) that is evenly distributed throughout the depth
of the ﬁlm. The water washed sample contains negligible anion counts, comparable to
the neat ﬁlm (Figure 2D). The Li+ counts decreased after post-process water treat-
ment; however, it was not completely removed from the treated sample (Figure 2C).
These results suggest that a signiﬁcant portion of the Li-TFSI additive is removed
(complete removal of the anion and partial removal of the cation) with post-processing
via water treatment. As the majority of ionic additive is removed from the ﬁlm, electro-
static interactions associated with the ionic additives cannot be responsible for main-
taining water insolubility. Additionally, previous reports of PEDOT:PSS insolubility in
the literature have been attributed to the removal of PSS, which is the water-soluble
component.4,27 However, this is not consistent with our XPS and SIMS observations
in ESA-processed samples, whereby signiﬁcant PSS remains present in the ﬁlm, there-
fore requiring further investigation into the whereabouts and role of PSS in water-sta-
ble PEDOT:PSS.
We have evaluated the mesoscale ﬁbrillar architecture of time-dependent ESA-pro-
cessed thin ﬁlms to visualize whether the solution-phase architecture is preserved in
the solid state. To do so, we have used energy-ﬁltered transmission electron micro-
scopy (EFTEM) on ﬁlms of neat PEDOT:PSS (Figure 3A) and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI
(Figures 3B and 3C) processed at different stages of aging (6 h and 4 days, respec-
tively), and we present results as thickness map images (Figure S18). EFTEM has
been successfully used in the past to increase the mass contrast of polymeric mate-
rials.53,54 The morphology of neat ﬁlms resembles granular segregated islands. With
the addition of Li-TFSI and moderate solution aging, the granular structure trans-
forms into a well-deﬁned ﬁbrilar structure, associated with PEDOT-rich regions, ex-
tending and connecting to neighboring islands. Extensive aging of the solution
leads to the formation of a thin ﬁlm exhibiting interconnected and well-deﬁned
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1077
Article

ﬁbrilar structures resembling a web-like microstructure that maintains a high ﬁdelity
with its solution-phase architecture. Observed time-dependent structural changes
directly affect ﬁlm conductivity (Figure 3D) as values increase rapidly during the
initial 4 h of solution aging to 750 S/cm, followed by a more gradual increase up
to 1,130 S/cm after 4 days, a behavior that closely mimics the time-dependent
Figure 2. PEDOT:PSS water resistance and micro crystallinity post water treatment
(A) 3D print of NCSU designs on glass substrate submerged in Petri dish of water. Neat PEDOT:PSS quickly dissolves in water, while PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI
print remains stable in water.
(B) Effect of water submersion on the thickness of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI ﬁlms. Each data point is averaged over 5 samples at the
respective submersion time (x axis). The error bars show the standard deviation of measurements. The inset shows the XPS results for PEDOT:PSS and
water-submerged PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI.
(C and D) ToF-SIMS proﬁles of PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI, and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI post water submersion in negative and positive ion collection
modes. F ions are associated to the bis(triﬂuoromethanesulfonyl)imide anion section of Li-TFSI salt. The signiﬁcant count of Li+ in solid ﬁlms after water
submersion shows the preference of Li+ to interact with PSS.
(E–G) Ex situ 2D GIWAXS patterns of thin ﬁlms fabricated from (E) PEDOT:PSS, (F) PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solution aged 4 days, and (G) PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI
solution aged 4 days post-water treatment.
(H) Out-of-plane and 1D GIWAXS patterns of PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI (solution aged 4 days), and water-treated ﬁlms.
(I) Parallel and perpendicular co-crystals of PEDOT:PSS distinguished by the edge-on or face-on orientation of the PSS chain relative to PEDOT.
ll
1078 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

solution viscosity reported in Figure 1B. We sought to conﬁrm the conductivity is
electronic and its enhancement is attributed to structural changes in the ﬁlm rather
than to the presence of ion-mediated transport. Electrochemical impedance spec-
troscopy measurements of the solid ﬁlm (4-day aged) display a vertical line consis-
tent with purely electronically conductive materials, lacking ionic mobility, in line
with previous reports of PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI thin ﬁlms27 (Figure 3D, inset).
The crystal structure within these ﬁbrillar ﬁlms was examined using GIWAXS. Scat-
tering proﬁles were ﬁrst ﬁt with log-cubic background subtractions, and then peaks
Figure 3. Microstructure of insoluble thin ﬁlms
(A–C) Energy-ﬁltered transmission microscopy (EFTEM) thickness map images of PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms showing (A) neat PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:Li-
TFSI ﬁlms made after 6 h (B) and 4 days (C) aging, respectively.
(D) Thin-ﬁlm conductivity of PEDOT:PSS and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI with respect to aging; ﬁlms have not been treated with water. The inset shows the
Nyquist plot of the solid ﬁlm made from a 4-day-aged solution, conﬁrming the conductivity is purely electronic in nature, lacking ionic transport.
(E–L) Dominant crystal structures present in thin ﬁlms (E–H) and (I–L) corresponding high-angle annular dark-ﬁeld scanning transmission electron microscopy
(HAADF-STEM) of neat PEDOT:PSS, ESA-processed PEDOT:PSS, post-water-treated, and water-swollen thin ﬁlms. The addition of Li-TFSI promotes PEDOT-rich
crystalline structures and PSS-rich aggregates, visually observed by high-intensity regions. Water treatment causes rich PEDOT structures to transition to co-
crystals, and the microstructure displays a higher density of ﬁbers without amorphous PSS regions. Cryo-STEM images of ﬁlms submerged in water (hydrated)
show the presence of swollen co-crystal structures, and interconnectivity of the ﬁbers is maintained. Scale bar denotes 200 nm.
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1079
Article

were analyzed using Voight ﬁtting methods55,56 (see the supplemental information
for more information). The 2D GIWAXS patterns of neat PEDOT:PSS display out-of-
plane low-angle (q < 1 A˚ 1) scattering typically attributed to PEDOT:PSS lamellar
stacking22–24 and weak isotropic ordering of PSS (q = 1.23 A˚ 1) and PEDOT p-p
stacking (q = 1.89 A˚ 1)39,57 (Figure 2E). The addition of Li-TFSI increases crystallinity
and anisotropic molecular ordering in the ﬁlm, which is commonly related to
enhanced conductivity (Figure 2F).27,47,58 Notably, a scattering feature emerges
with the addition of Li-TFSI (qz  0.89 A˚ 1) representing out-of-plane PEDOT-rich
(100) stacking27 (see supplemental information for more details). Scattering along
q = 1.8 A˚ 1 displays enhanced texture both in plane (qxy) and out of pane (qz)
compared to that of the neat ﬁlm.
Peak ﬁtting of 1D scattering proﬁles in the qz and qxy directions (Figures 2H and S21)
provides additional insight regarding variations in thin-ﬁlm crystal structure and orien-
tation. Low q value scattering (q < 1 A˚ 1) present in all three ﬁlms can be attributed to
two distinct alternately stacked polymer structures that we refer to as PEDOT:PSS co-
crystals22–25 (Figure 2I). Parallel co-crystals are composed of alternately stacked
PEDOT and PSS chains oriented edge-on with respect to each other and maintain a
d-spacing of 21.8 A˚ . Neat PEDOT:PSS contains a Bragg progression (h00) of parallel
co-crystals oriented out of plane at qz = 0.28, 0.57, and 0.83 A˚ 1 for (100), (200), and
(300),
respectively
(Figure
2H
and
supplemental
information).
In
contrast,
PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI contains perpendicular co-crystals composed of alternately
stacked PEDOT and PSS chains with face-on orientation of PSS relative to PEDOT
chains, creating a d-spacing of 13.6 A˚ (qz = 0.45 A˚ 1, Figure 2I).
Water-treated PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI ﬁlms more closely resemble neat PEDOT:PSS
scattering signals (Figure 2G). Water-treated ﬁlms do not display scattering features
from PEDOT (100) (qz = 0.89 A˚ 1), PEDOT p-p stacking (q = 1.89 A˚ 1) is concen-
trated in-plane (qxy), and low q scattering (qz < 1) broadens, which suggest a struc-
tural reorganization after water exposure. However, it is important to recall that
these ﬁlms retain their interconnected ﬁbrillar hierarchy and electrical conductivity
despite undergoing these changes (see supplemental information for further discus-
sion). The effect of water exposure on the hierarchical structure of PEDOT:PSS:Li-
TFSI ﬁlms suggests localized reorganization without disruption of ﬁbrillar networks
and warrants further evaluation. We imaged dry and hydrated ﬁbrils with high-angle
annular dark-ﬁeld scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM)
(Figures 3I–3L) that were analyzed in conjunction with GIWAXS results. The domi-
nant crystal structures of the associated samples, as determined using GIWAXS,
are displayed in Figures 3E–3H. The neat PEDOT:PSS sample, composed of namely
parallel co-crystalline structures, exhibits a granular morphology and small ﬁbers
with limited long-range connectivity. The formation of ﬁbers is apparent in the Li-
TFSI sample, and agglomerates are observed to interconnect. The higher intensity
regions (white contrast) of the Li-TFSI sample are associated with domains that
contain a higher density of excess PSS. Similar to Li-TFSI, the water-treated sample
shows a high density of ﬁbers with long-range connectivity, but unlike Li-TFSI, the
treated sample shows a uniform ﬁbril structure that lacks the higher intensity phases
(white regions associated to PSS). The excess PSS is thus removed after water expo-
sure, revealing a more open networked structure with a higher density of ﬁbers
compared to as-prepared Li-TFSI ﬁlms.
Altogether, our data show that PEDOT:PSS electrostatically self-assembles, crystal-
lizes, and networks in the solution phase with the aid of ionic additives to form
structures that translate in the solid state to highly networked ﬁbrillar ﬁlms with
ll
1080 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

co-crystallized PEDOT:PSS phases that are intrinsically water stable and maintain
electrical conductivity during swelling in aqueous environments. By leveraging the
intrinsic multiscale network architecture, a high degree of order and conductivity
is achieved in the ﬁlms without the need for chemical crosslinkers such as GOPS
for biological applications in aqueous environments, severely limiting its overall per-
formance,14 or the need for acid washing, which may be toxic and difﬁcult to
process.
Mixed conduction and high-performance OECTs
We sought to apply the unique features of ﬁbril-networked water-stabilized
PEDOT:PSS to OECTs. Speciﬁcally, we leveraged the absence of GOPS and the ben-
eﬁts of ionic salts in enhancing conductivity and interconnected morphology consist-
ing of co-crystallized PEDOT and PSS, which we anticipate will enhance mobility as
well as improve volumetric capacitance by removing excess insulating components.
OECTs were fabricated from the PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solutions, as prepared and
aged for 4 days, respectively. OECTs from the standard PEDOT:PSS blend with the
addition of 5 vol % ethylene glycol, 0.25 vol % 4-dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid
(DBSA), and 1 vol % GOPS were also prepared as reference devices. As neat
PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms are water soluble, chemical crosslinkers such as GOPS are necessary
to maintain ﬁlm properties for the reference device.14 PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI ﬁlms, on the
other hand, do not require such chemical crosslinkers, as the ﬁlms are stable in water.
The OECTs were fabricated based on a previously published protocol.59 Details on the
device fabrication are provided in the experimental procedures section. PEDOT:PSS
solutions were spin-coated to create the channel (thickness, t, between 90 and
100 nm), and the channel width was deﬁned by a pre-patterned parylene-C (PaC)
ﬁlm, which insulates the rest of Au electrodes in order for the electrolyte to come in
contact only with the PEDOT:PSS channel. Transfer characteristics and transconduc-
tance (Figures 4C and 4D, respectively), normalized for channel length and collected
at a drain voltage of 0.6 V (VD = 0.6 V), portray typical characteristics for depletion-
mode OECTs (p-type) as the device is turned ‘‘OFF’’ with an increase in a positive gate
voltage (VG) due to dedoping of the PEDOT:PSS channel. The addition of Li-TFSI and
consecutive solution aging signiﬁcantly improve the maximum transconductance
value (gm = 19.6 and 31.4 mS, as prepared and 4 days aged, respectively) compared
to the reference device (gm = 6.8 mS), all of which are located at approximately VG =
0.2 V. Output characteristics of the 4-day-aged device show that the drain current (ID)
is linear at low VD (ohmic behavior), suggesting a good ohmic contact between the
channel and Au electrodes. Furthermore, when the magnitude of VD exceeds the
pinch-off voltage, ID becomes saturated and only depends on VG, indicating that
this OECT works as typical long-channel devices. As gm is dependent on channel vol-
ume due to the volumetric nature of charge transport in OECTs,13 the product of the
carrier mobility (m) and volumetric capacitance (C*) is used as a ﬁgure of merit to
compare the steady-state OECT performance (Figure S32).16 A decoupling of mC*
into m and C* can provide insight into why the charge transport in PEDOT:PSS:Li-
TFSI ﬁlms improves (Figure S33). Here, m was determined by extracting the carrier
transit time (te) using the frequency-dependent approach previously reported,16,60
as described in methods. For extracting C*, the channel capacitance was ﬁrst obtained
from a linear ﬁt of electrochemical impedance spectra and then normalized by the vol-
ume of the channel, including the source/drain contact overlaps. Compared to the
reference OECT, the addition of Li-TFSI leads to increases in C* and m, and consecu-
tive solution aging (4 days) improves both values further. The m values are observed to
decrease with an increase in positive VG. This can be understood by the fact that m de-
pends on the location of the Fermi energy due to the disordered band tail. For the Li-
TFSI devices, the change of mobility as a function of VG is smaller compared to that of
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1081
Article

the reference device. This suggests that the ionic additives mitigate the disordered
band tail, which is consistent with the improvement in ﬁlm crystallinity.61 The ﬁgure
of merit (mC*) is plotted as a function of VG (Figure 4F). The reference OECT shows
an expected mC* value of 160 F/cmVs (at VG = 0 V and VD = 0.6 V), in line with pre-
viously reported literature, while there is a signiﬁcant enhancement for ESA-processed
ﬁlms at time 0 (471.6 F/cmVs) and 4 days aging (752.5 F/cmVs), generating the highest
value reported among thin-ﬁlm OECTs (Figure 4G and Table S1).
This unprecedentedly high OECT performance is attributed to the improvement in
ﬁlm crystallinity and microstructure as well as the modiﬁcation in ﬁlm composition.
It is well known that the carrier mobility in PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms is enhanced through
the addition of dopants such as ethylene glycol62 or bulky polyions.15 However,
this method leads to a reduction in C* compared to neat PEDOT:PSS as the addi-
tional dopants increase the dead volume with excess electrically insulating phases.16
This trade-off issue can be resolved by the addition of Li-TFSI to the PEDOT:PSS so-
lution as Li-TFSI improves inter-chain ordering, and therefore mobility, while excess
amorphous PSS and Li-TFSI are removed from the ﬁlm by simply soaking in water.
This facile post-deposition water treatment is observed to enhance the ﬁbril micro-
structure and promote a more porous structure that enables a large volume density
of charges and thus an increase in C*,4 as evident in STEM images (Figures 3K and
Figure 4. Electrical characteristics of PEDOT:PSS-based OECTs
(A) Schematic of an OECT device in the OFF state.
(B) The ON state as VG>0.
(C and D) Transfer characteristics (C) and transconductance (D) of the OECTs made from standard PEDOT:PSS (green) and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solutions
(orange: no solution aging, purple: aged 4 days) at VD of 0.6 V. Values are normalized by channel length.
(E) Output curves of an OECT made from a PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solution aged for 4 days.
(F) Extracted mC* as a function of VG at VD = 0.6 V.
(G) OECT ﬁgure of merit mOECT – C* map comparing ESA-processed PEDOT:PSS from this work (orange) and values from literature. Dashed lines display
mC* product. ESA-processed PEDOT:PSS, both as prepared (time 0) and aged, outperform all other thin-ﬁlm OECTs including PEDOT-based devices
(green) and other polymers (purple) in the literature.
ll
1082 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

3L). Solution aging, promoting self-assembly, additionally improves C*, which can
be attributed to an increase in charge delocalization conﬁrmed by UV-vis near-
infrared spectra27,63 (Figure S31) leading to an increase in carrier density and there-
fore proportionally affecting C*.64 Additionally, the interconnected ﬁbril network
provides efﬁcient hole transport pathways throughout the PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm, which
leads to an improvement in carrier mobility. Solution aging promotes the formation
of interconnected ﬁbers in thin ﬁlms, leading to a further enhanced carrier mobility of
9.1 cm2/Vs at VG = 0 V.
DISCUSSION
In-depth experimental and computational investigations of the solution-phase ESA
of aqueous PEDOT:PSS with the addition of ionic additive revealed a multiscale
colloidal ESA together with elongation and intermixing of polymer chains toward
the formation of ﬁbrillar structures that are networked in solution, as observed by
cryo-EM and conﬁrmed by solution conductivity and viscosity measurements. Aging
in the presence of ionic additives, speciﬁcally Li-TFSI, allows the ESA to progress,
further enhancing solution ﬁbril formation and allowing for time-dependent manip-
ulation of solution properties. Evidence of PEDOT:PSS co-crystals is additionally
present in the solution phase as evident by in situ GIWAXS measurements. Fibril for-
mation and PEDOT:PSS co-crystalline structures are transferred to thin-ﬁlm
morphology and crystallinity, resulting in a multiscale interconnected network that
enables facile mixed transport and simultaneous water stability. Combining our un-
derstanding of microstructure, crystallinity, and composition, the following model is
proposed (Figures 5A–5D). Neat PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms are largely composed of parallel
co-crystalline structures; however, these crystalline regions lack long-range ﬁbril in-
terconnectivity. Regions of disconnected crystal structures are surrounded by excess
amorphous material, namely water-soluble PSS. The lack of connectivity between
neighboring crystalline islands leads to limited charge percolation pathways and
limits water stability, as amorphous regions dissolve in water, leaving crystalline
islands to ﬂake apart, incapable of maintaining ﬁlm integrity. This contrasts with
ESA-processed PEDOT:PSS, speciﬁcally using Li-TFSI, as ﬁlms are composed of in-
terconnected ﬁbers composed largely of perpendicular co-crystals and phase-sepa-
rated PEDOT (h00) stacking (Figure 5B). The interconnectivity of crystalline regions
enables facile charge transport. During post-process water treatment, the intercon-
nected ﬁber structure remains as the ﬁlm swells (observed by cryogenic scanning
transmission electron microscopy [cryo-STEM] of hydrated samples). The composi-
tion of the ﬁlm is altered as TFSI anions, a portion of Li+ cations, and residual amor-
phous PSS are removed. As the ionic additive is removed from the system, the dy-
namic nature of the crystal structures allows the ﬁbrous connections to transition
from PEDOT (h00)-rich regions to co-crystal phases. The co-crystalline structure is
thought to enable water insolubility of PEDOT:PSS as PSS, typically prone to solubi-
lizing, is stabilized in the crystal between PEDOT chains and is trapped in a long-
range web-like morphology. Post-processed ﬁlms (Figure 5C) maintain their long-
range ﬁbril interconnectivity, and therefore, the ﬁlm remains insoluble and highly
conducting. ESA-processed PEDOT:PSS is additionally capable of swelling in the
presence of water while maintaining the overall integrity of the ﬁbular microstructure
(Figure 5D) to permit simultaneous charge transport and ion intercalation, necessary
for OECT function.
OECT channel materials must permit efﬁcient charge transport while facilitating ion
uptake and transport, properties that are typically understood to require conﬂicting
material
morphologies.65–67
The
hierarchical
structure
of
ESA-processed
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1083
Article

PEDOT:PSS, however, enables simultaneous charge transport, ion permeation, and
efﬁcient ion-to-electron coupling, leading to high-performance OECTs, as summa-
rized in Figure 5E. Rich PEDOT regions aligned and interconnected within co-crys-
tals allow efﬁcient long-range charge transport necessary for enhanced channel cur-
rent ID. ESA-processed materials additionally maintain the majority of hydrophilic
PSS necessary to uptake and transport ions from the electrolyte, leading to
improved volumetric capacitance. Furthermore, ESA is thought to improve the
transduction of ionic signals into electric current as the intimate contact between
PEDOT and PSS components within the co-crystalline structure improves ionic-to-
electronic coupling. This study observes enhancements in both the mobility and
volumetric capacitance, whereas other studies traditionally improve one metric at
the cost of the other.16 These improvements in both the mobility and volumetric
capacitance are crucial to improving the signal-to-noise ratio of OECTs, beneﬁting
their use in bioelectronics.68 Moreover, enhancing the switching speed of OECTs
is also necessary for memory and circuit-based applications, which beneﬁt from
enhanced mobility of the channel material.69
Conclusion
In summary, we identify ESA of PEDOT:PSS, enabled by the addition of ionic ad-
ditives,
which
results
in
a
multiscale
network
composed
of
co-crystalline
Figure 5. Mixed conductor hierarchical microstructures and OECT operation
Schematic summarizing composition, nanocrystalline structure, and micro-interconnected morphology ﬁndings of thin ﬁlms.
(A) Neat PEDOT:PSS is a mixed conductor containing co-crystal structures; however, it lacks a long-range ﬁbril network and suffers from poor mixed
transport and is susceptible to water solubility.
(B) ESA-processed mixed conductor results in ﬁbrils of co-crystal phases networked over a long range.
(C) These are maintained after water treatment and signiﬁcant removal of ionic additive.
(D) The ﬁbril structures are observed to swell but maintain percolation pathways during water hydration enabling mixed conduction.
(E) Schematic showing the effect of ESA on OECT performance where the percolated network of co-crystal phases maintains pathways for facile hole
transport, while the co-crystal ﬁbrils promote efﬁcient ion-to-electronic coupling. Note: to reduce clutter, PEDOT contiguity was not visualized along
conducting pathways.
ll
1084 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

PEDOT:PSS phases interconnected within an extended ﬁbril morphology. ESA is
manipulated by time-dependent solution processing to allow tunable mixed con-
duction properties and results in water-stable PEDOT:PSS thin ﬁlms. Combined,
this study overcomes the fundamental stability-performance compromise of
PEDOT:PSS-based OECTs, as improvements in the ﬁlm crystallinity, morphology,
and composition result in the fabrication of intrinsically water-stable thin-ﬁlm
OECTs with the highest benchmark value (mC* = 752.5 F/cmVs) recorded for
both depletion- and enhancement-mode thin-ﬁlm devices.16,21,70 The hierarchical
structure composed of interconnected co-crystalline phases results in improve-
ments to both the charge mobility and volumetric capacitance and illustrates the
signiﬁcant material enhancement as such properties are typically understood to
require conﬂicting morphologies. Overall, we ﬁnd the concepts and characteriza-
tion strategy in this work to be generally applicable and hope that it promotes
additional advancements in the ﬁeld of organic electronics, namely high-perfor-
mance OECTs.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Resource availability
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be ful-
ﬁlled by the lead contact, Aram Amassian (aamassi@ncsu.edu).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
The data used to support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the lead con-
tact upon reasonable request.
Material preparation and characterization
PEDOT:PSS solution (Clevios PH1000, Heraeus) and Li-TFSI (bis(triﬂuoromethane)
sulfonimide lithium salt, Millipore Sigma) were used without further puriﬁcation.
Unless otherwise stated, PEDOT:PSS:ionic salt compositions were formulated by
adding 40 wt % ionic salt to PEDOT:PSS (assuming 1.15% solids) and mixed for
a minimum of 2 min to create a homogeneous solution. Solutions were then stored
undisturbed, at room temperature, away from direct light exposure, for the spec-
iﬁed aging time and mixed immediately before use. Qualitative solution viscosity
measurements were determined using a rotational viscometer, Anton Paar
ViscoQC 100. Solution resistance was evaluated using a 4-point probe method
in a constant solution volume (Figure S1). PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms were prepared by
depositing and spin-coating solutions on pre-cleaned and UV-ozone-treated sub-
strates and annealed at 120C for 10 min to achieve a ﬁlm thickness between 100
and 150 nm. The electrical conductivities of thin ﬁlms were measured using a
4-point probe method, and mixed ion-electron conductivity was explored through
impedance measurements using BioLogic SP-200 Potentiostat. Thin-ﬁlm thickness
was determined using a Tencor P-7 Stylus mechanical proﬁlometer. Water-treated
ﬁlms were prepared by submerging the thin ﬁlm in DI water for 120 s, unless other-
wise noted, and then dried using nitrogen gas or annealing the ﬁlm at 60C for
15 min to remove excess water. NCSU designs and interconnects for water stability
were prepared by printing dehydrated PEDOT:PSS solutions on glass substrates
using a Musashi ShotMaster SX. Partially dehydrated PEDOT:PSS was made by
evaporating water from PEDOT:PSS by heating to 60C with constant stirring to
achieve
removal
of
1/3
volume
water.
Additives
were
introduced
after
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1085
Article

dehydration. Prints were ﬁrst dried at 60C for 30 min followed by 120C for 10 min
to reduce air bubbles.
Molecular dynamics simulations
MD simulations were carried out using the AMBER 2019 software package.71 The
system consisted of 10 PEDOT and 6 PSS polymer chains, composed of 6 and 18
monomer units in length, respectively, with PSS monomers in excess (ratio of 1:2.5
w/w). Systems were solvated with TIP3P water in a 10 nm 3 10 nm 3 10 nm box
to result in a solids concentration of 13 wt %. For ionic salt studies, equal units of
Li+ and TFSI were added. Each system was simulated for 100 ns at 300 K and 1
atm, after initial energy minimization, heating, and equilibration stages following
protocols described in previous work.72 Further details on the employed simulation
methodology are included in the supplemental information.
ToF-SIMS and XPS
ToF-SIMS experiments were performed using an ION TOF-SIMS V (ION TOF, Chest-
nut Ridge, NY) instrument equipped with a bismuth liquid metal ion gun, Cs+ sput-
tering gun, and an electron ﬂood gun for charge compensation. Dual-beam dynamic
SIMS mode was used to provide high-depth resolution and chemical resolution
simultaneously. Bi3++ and Cs+ were employed as the primary ion and sputtering
sources, respectively. The sputtering ions with an energy of 3 keV were used to
sputter the organic interfaces. Both bismuth and cesium ion columns were oriented
at 45 with respect to the sample surface normal. The raster sizes of 50 3 50 mm2 and
150 3 150 mm2 were used as analysis and sputter areas, respectively. The analysis
chamber pressure is maintained below 5.0 3 10–9 mbar to avoid contamination of
the surfaces to be analyzed. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was performed on
thin ﬁlms using a PHOIBOS 150 XPS.
X-ray scattering
X-ray scattering was performed on the Complex Materials Scattering beamline
(CMS, 11-BM) at the National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II). PEDOT:PSS so-
lutions were characterized using SAXS with an energy of 17 keV, exposure time of 30
s, and a sample to detector distance of 5 m. Borosilicate glass capillary tubes
(Charles Supper Company, outer diameter 1.0 mm) were used. Static and in situ
thin-ﬁlm GIWAXS measurements were preformed using a beam energy of 13.5
keV and a Pilatus800K detector located 259 mm away from the sample. Static mea-
surements were performed in vacuum using an exposure time of 20 s. In situ spin-
coating data were collected using a home-built custom-designed spin-coater. Expo-
sure time of in situ experiments ranged from 1 to 3 s, with longer exposure times
needed to detect solution-phase scattering in the initial phases of spin-coating. A
Python code was used to analyze data and stitch in situ GIWAXS snapshots to study
the evolution of X-ray diffraction. Additional information regarding data analysis and
interpretation can be found in the supplemental information.
Cryogenic transmission electron microscopy
The self-assembly of PEDOT:PSS in solution phase and in the presence of ionic salt
was observed by cryo-EM. Quantifoil Holey Carbon Grids, 300 mesh, with 1-mm hole
size and 2-mm spacings (Quantifoil MicroTools, Jena, Germany), were used for vitri-
ﬁcation of polymer micelle solutions (1 mg/mL in water). The grids were glow dis-
charged in a plasma cleaner for about 5 min with the carbon side of the grids facing
the plasma. FEI Vitrobot (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR) was used for the vitriﬁcation
of the micelle solutions. The vitriﬁcation was done using ﬁlter papers mounted to the
blotting pads with 12 s of blotting time. Cryogenic ethane was used for the
ll
1086 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

vitriﬁcation of the samples. The samples were preserved in vitreous ice in liquid ni-
trogen before acquiring the cryo-EM images. High-resolution cryogenic experi-
ments were performed on the FEI Talos Arctica G2 at the Huck Institute of the Life
Sciences at Pennsylvania State University. The measurements were conducted using
a 200-kV electron source and a Falcone 3 direct electron detector in linear mode.
The nanoprobe mode of the microscope with a 70-mm C2 aperture, with a spot
size of 5, at a nominal magniﬁcation of 120,0003, was employed to collect the
TEM images. Binning of 1 (no camera pixel binning) was used for the images with
4,096 3 4,096 pixels.
HAADF-STEM microscopy
Freestanding PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms were prepared by coating different compositions on
a thinpolymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) ﬁlm. In the next step, the sacriﬁcial PMMA
layer was dissolved in chlorobenzene, which resulted in freestanding PEDOT:PSS
thin ﬁlms that were picked up by copper TEM grids. To increase the wettability of
neat PEDOT:PSS on the PMMA layer, DBSA was also added to neat PEDOT:PSS
dispersion. A Talos F200X (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, OR, USA) at an acceleration
voltage of 200 kV was used in STEM mode with the HAADF detector inserted. A cam-
era length of 125 mm and spot 5 were used for STEM data acquisition. A 70-mm C2
aperture was inserted during the data acquisition. No camera pixel binning was used
for images with 4,096 3 4,096 pixels.
Cryogenic HAADF-STEM microscopy of the hydrated thin ﬁlm
Cryo-STEM was performed on a 200-kV Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc FEI Talos F200C
with the HAADF detector inserted. The cryo box of the FEI Talos F200C was inserted
during the imaging of hydrated PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI thin ﬁlms. A GATAN cryo-trans-
fer holder was used for sample transfer and imaging. The vitriﬁed samples were
loaded on the cryo-transfer holder at a temperature below 170C. HAADF-STEM
images were acquired with a 2-ms dwell time. No camera pixel binning was used
for the images with 2048 3 2048 pixels. Quantifoil Holey Carbon Grids, 300 mesh,
with 1-mm hole size and 2-mm spacings (Quantifoil MicroTools, Jena, Germany),
were used for hydration and vitriﬁcation of PEDOT:PSS+Li-TFSI thin ﬁlms. No
glow discharge was used prior to hydration and vitriﬁcation of the thin ﬁlms. An
FEI Vitrobot (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR) was used for the vitriﬁcation of hydrated
thin ﬁlms. 3 mL DI water was carefully deposited on the PEDOT:PSS thin ﬁlm. To
assure the ﬁlm swelling, the blotting was done 60 s after water deposition on the
thin ﬁlms. Two ﬁlter papers mounted on blotting pads were used for blotting micelle
solutions with a total hold time of 3 s and 2 repetitions. A 10-s delay time was used
between blotting and vitriﬁcation. Cryogenic ethane was used for the vitriﬁcation of
the samples. The samples were preserved in vitreous ice in liquid nitrogen before
acquiring cryo-STEM images.
OECT fabrication and characterization
OECTs were fabricated based on a previously published protocol.59 Brieﬂy, source
and drain electrodes were formed on cleaned glass substrates by depositing Ti
(5 nm)/Au (100 nm) using an e-beam evaporator (Kurt J Lesker PVD-75) and a sub-
sequent lift-off process. A 2-mm-thick PaC was deposited on the samples to elec-
trically insulate the Au electrodes after a silane treatment using Silane A-174. A
sacriﬁcial PaC layer was deposited after spin-coating a diluted Micro-90 (2% v/v
in deionized water) as an antiadhesive layer. The OECT channels and contact
pads were opened by photolithography and reactive ion etching (Oxford 80 Plas-
malab plus). After surface activation by oxygen plasma, the standard PEDOT:PSS
blend and PEDOT:PSS:Li-TFSI solutions (as prepared, aged for 4 days) were
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1087
Article

spin-coated at 3,000 and 4,000 rpm, respectively. The sacriﬁcial PaC was peeled
off to pattern the OECT channels, and then the samples were baked at 130C
for 1 h. Film thicknesses were measured using a DekTak XT Proﬁlometer. The
ﬁlm thickness was 100 G 7 nm (reference), 90 G 1 nm (Li-TFSI as prepared),
and 97 G 5 nm (Li-TFSI aged for 4 days). The channel dimension was deﬁned
by width of 400 mm, contact overlaps of 20 mm for both source and drain, and
length of 50 mm (reference) and 100 mm (Li-TFSI samples). The measured ID was
normalized by the channel length.
All the electrical measurements were performed using a Keysight B2902A Source-
Measure Unit controlled custom Python code with an Ag/AgCl pellet (World Pre-
cision Instruments), as a gate electrode, in a 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline so-
lution. The carrier mobility was obtained based on the frequency-dependent
method.16,60 To be speciﬁc, a sinusoidal voltage with varying frequency and ampli-
tude of G10 mV was applied at the gate with a ﬁxed VD of 0.6 V. The resulting
gate (IG) and drain currents (ID) are measured. The carrier transit time (te) can be
extracted from the frequency domain relation: DIG(f) = 2pf teDID, and then the car-
rier mobility can be calculated by m = L2/teVD. For the volumetric capacitance, the
amplitude of impedance was plotted based on the measured sinusoidal VG and IG
(i.e., DVG/DIG). The channel capacitance was extracted from a linear ﬁt of the elec-
trochemical impedance spectra and then normalized by the channel volume to
obtain C*.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.
2023.12.021.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A.A. acknowledges support from ONR, United States under awards N00014-20-1-
2183 and N00014-23-1-2001. M.G. and E.D.G. acknowledge support from ONR,
United States under award N00014-19-1-2453. L.T. and A.A. acknowledge the US
Department of Defense (DoD) and the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) for
the provision of the Science Mathematics and Research for Transformation (SMART)
scholarship. A.L.K., L.T., and Y.G.Y. acknowledge the computing resources- pro-
vided by North Carolina State University High Performance Computing Services
Core Facility (RRID:SCR_022168). We acknowledge supports from the Analytical
Instrumentation Facility (AIF) at North Carolina State University, which is supported
by the State of North Carolina and the National Science Foundation, United States
(award no. ECCS-2025064). The AIF is a member of the North Carolina Research Tri-
angle Nanotechnology Network (RTNN), a site in the National Nanotechnology Co-
ordinated Infrastructure (NNCI). We acknowledge Dr. Sung Hyun Cho’s assistance
with cryo-EM data acquisition and the cryo-EM facility available in Huck Institutes
of the Life Sciences at Penn State University.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.A., M.G., and L.T. designed the scientiﬁc framework and experiments. L.T. and
M.G. executed all solution and thin-ﬁlm characterization and analyzed and inter-
preted the data. M.G. and E.D.G. executed and analyzed TEM measurements.
A.L.K. and Y.G.Y. developed molecular dynamics simulations framework and assis-
ted in execution. R.L. assisted in GIWAXS data analysis and interpretation. N.W. de-
signed GIWAXS in situ spin-coater hardware. S.H., S.T.K., and G.G.M. performed
and analyzed OECT measurements.
ll
1088 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: May 29, 2023
Revised: October 26, 2023
Accepted: December 13, 2023
Published: January 16, 2024
REFERENCES
1. Liang, Y., Offenha¨usser, A., Ingebrandt, S., and
Mayer, D. (2021). PEDOT:PSS-Based
Bioelectronic Devices for Recording and
Modulation of Electrophysiological and
Biochemical Cell Signals. Adv. Healthcare
Mater. 10, 2100061.
2. Gkoupidenis, P., Schaefer, N., Garlan, B., and
Malliaras, G.G. (2015). Neuromorphic
Functions in PEDOT:PSS Organic
Electrochemical Transistors. Adv. Mater. 27,
7176–7180.
3. Romele, P., Gkoupidenis, P., Koutsouras, D.A.,
Lieberth, K., Kova´cs-Vajna, Z.M., Blom, P.W.M.,
and Torricelli, F. (2020). Multiscale real time
and high sensitivity ion detection with
complementary organic electrochemical
transistors ampliﬁer. Nat. Commun. 11, 3743.
4. Kim, S.M., Kim, C.H., Kim, Y., Kim, N., Lee,
W.J., Lee, E.H., Kim, D., Park, S., Lee, K.,
Rivnay, J., and Yoon, M.H. (2018). Inﬂuence
of PEDOT:PSS crystallinity and composition
on electrochemical transistor performance
and long-term stability. Nat. Commun.
9, 3858.
5. Liao, C., Mak, C., Zhang, M., Chan, H.L.W., and
Yan, F. (2015). Flexible Organic
Electrochemical Transistors for Highly
Selective Enzyme Biosensors and Used for
Saliva Testing. Adv. Mater. 27, 676–681.
6. Li, T., Cheryl Koh, J.Y., Moudgil, A., Cao, H.,
Wu, X., Chen, S., Hou, K., Surendran, A.,
Stephen, M., Tang, C., et al. (2022).
Biocompatible Ionic Liquids in High-
Performing Organic Electrochemical
Transistors for Ion Detection and
Electrophysiological Monitoring. ACS Nano
16, 12049–12060.
7. Khodagholy, D., Doublet, T., Quilichini, P.,
Gurﬁnkel, M., Leleux, P., Ghestem, A.,
Ismailova, E., Herve´ , T., Sanaur, S., Bernard, C.,
and Malliaras, G.G. (2013). In vivo recordings of
brain activity using organic transistors. Nat.
Commun. 4, 1575.
8. Tseng, C.P., Liu, F., Zhang, X., Huang, P.C.,
Campbell, I., Li, Y., Atkinson, J.T., Terlier, T.,
Ajo-Franklin, C.M., Silberg, J.J., and Verduzco,
R. (2022). Solution-Deposited and Patternable
Conductive Polymer Thin-Film Electrodes for
Microbial Bioelectronics. Adv. Mater. 34,
2109442.
9. Gkoupidenis, P., Koutsouras, D.A., and
Malliaras, G.G. (2017). Neuromorphic device
architectures with global connectivity through
electrolyte gating. Nat. Commun. 8, 15448.
10. Lingstedt, L.V., Ghittorelli, M., Lu, H.,
Koutsouras, D.A., Marszalek, T., Torricelli, F.,
Craciun, N.I., Gkoupidenis, P., and Blom,
P.W.M. (2019). Effect of DMSO Solvent
Treatments on the Performance of PEDOT:PSS
Based Organic Electrochemical Transistors.
Adv. Electron. Mater. 5, 1800804.
11. Ko, J., Wu, X., Surendran, A., Muhammad, B.T.,
and Leong, W.L. (2020). Self-Healable Organic
Electrochemical Transistor with High
Transconductance, Fast Response, and Long-
Term Stability. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12,
33979–33988.
12. Rivnay, J., Inal, S., Collins, B.A., Sessolo, M.,
Stavrinidou, E., Strakosas, X., Tassone, C.,
Delongchamp, D.M., and Malliaras, G.G.
(2016). Structural control of mixed ionic and
electronic transport in conducting polymers.
Nat. Commun. 7, 11287.
13. Rivnay, J., Leleux, P., Ferro, M., Sessolo, M.,
Williamson, A., Koutsouras, D.A.,
Khodagholy, D., Ramuz, M., Strakosas, X.,
Owens, R.M., et al. (2015). High-
performance transistors for bioelectronics
through tuning of channel thickness. Sci.
Adv. 1, e1400251.
14. Ha˚kansson, A., Han, S., Wang, S., Lu, J.,
Braun, S., Fahlman, M., Berggren, M.,
Crispin, X., and Fabiano, S. (2017). Effect of
(3-Glycidyloxypropyl)Trimethoxysilane
(GOPS) on the Electrical Properties of
PEDOT:PSS Films. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym.
Phys. 55, 814–820.
15. Inal, S., Rivnay, J., Hofmann, A.I., Uguz, I.,
Mumtaz, M., Katsigiannopoulos, D., Brochon,
C., Cloutet, E., Hadziioannou, G., and
Malliaras, G.G. (2016). Organic Electrochemical
Transistors Based on PEDOT with Different
Anionic Polyelectrolyte Dopants. J. Polym. Sci.
B Polym. Phys. 54, 147–151.
16. Inal, S., Malliaras, G.G., and Rivnay, J. (2017).
Benchmarking organic mixed conductors for
transistors. Nat. Commun. 8, 1767.
17. Du, X., Yang, L., and Liu, N. (2023). Recent
Progress on Poly(3,4-
Ethylenedioxythiophene):Poly(Styrenesulfonate)
Bioelectrodes. Small Science 3.
18. Giovannitti, A., Maria, I.P., Haniﬁ, D.,
Donahue, M.J., Bryant, D., Barth, K.J.,
Makdah, B.E., Savva, A., Moia, D., Zetek,
M., et al. (2018). The Role of the Side Chain
on the Performance of N-type Conjugated
Polymers in Aqueous Electrolytes. Chem.
Mater. 30, 2945–2953.
19. Savva, A., Hallani, R., Cendra, C., Surgailis, J.,
Hidalgo, T.C., Wustoni, S., Sheelamanthula, R.,
Chen, X., Kirkus, M., Giovannitti, A., et al.
(2020). Balancing Ionic and Electronic
Conduction for High-Performance Organic
Electrochemical Transistors. Adv. Funct. Mater.
30, 1907657.
20. Schmode, P., Savva, A., Kahl, R., Ohayon, D.,
Meichsner, F., Dolynchuk, O., Thurn-Albrecht,
T., Inal, S., and Thelakkat, M. (2020). The Key
Role of Side Chain Linkage in Structure
Formation and Mixed Conduction of Ethylene
Glycol Substituted Polythiophenes. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 12, 13029–13039.
21. Kim, Y., Noh, H., Paulsen, B.D., Kim, J., Jo, I.Y.,
Ahn, H., Rivnay, J., and Yoon, M.H. (2021).
Strain-Engineering Induced Anisotropic
Crystallite Orientation and Maximized Carrier
Mobility for High-Performance Microﬁber-
Based Organic Bioelectronic Devices. Adv.
Mater. 33, 2007550.
22. Kee, S., Kim, N., Kim, B.S., Park, S., Jang, Y.H.,
Lee, S.H., Kim, J., Kim, J., Kwon, S., and Lee, K.
(2016). Controlling Molecular Ordering in
Aqueous Conducting Polymers Using Ionic
Liquids. Adv. Mater. 28, 8625–8631.
23. Massonnet, N., Carella, A., de Geyer, A., Faure-
Vincent, J., and Simonato, J.P. (2015). Metallic
behaviour of acid doped highly conductive
polymers. Chem. Sci. 6, 412–417.
24. Kim, N., Lee, B.H., Choi, D., Kim, G., Kim, H.,
Kim, J.R., Lee, J., Kahng, Y.H., and Lee, K.
(2012). Role of Interchain Coupling in the
Metallic State of Conducting Polymers. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 109, 106405.
25. Aasmundtveit, K.E., Samuelsen, E.J.,
Pettersson, L.A.A., Ingana¨s, O., Johansson, T.,
and Feidenhans’l, R. (1999). Structure of thin
ﬁlms of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene).
Synth. Met. 101, 561–564.
26. Li, X., Liu, Z., Zhou, Z., Gao, H., Liang, G.,
Rauber, D., Kay, C.W.M., and Zhang, P.
(2021). Effects of Cationic Species in Salts
on the Electrical Conductivity of Doped
PEDOT:PSS Films. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater.
3, 98–103.
27. Wang, Y., Zhu, C., Pfattner, R., Yan, H., Jin, L.,
Chen, S., Molina-Lopez, F., Lissel, F., Liu, J.,
Rabiah, N.I., et al. (2017). A highly stretchable,
transparent, and conductive polymer. Sci. Adv.
3, e1602076.
28. Kee, S., Kim, H., Paleti, S.H.K., El Labban,
A., Neophytou, M., Emwas, A.H., Alshareef,
H.N., and Baran, D. (2019). Highly
Stretchable and Air-Stable PEDOT:PSS/Ionic
Liquid Composites for Efﬁcient Organic
Thermoelectrics. Chem. Mater. 31,
3519–3526.
29. Wu, X., Stephen, M., Hidalgo, T.C., Salim, T.,
Surgailis, J., Surendran, A., Su, X., Li, T., Inal, S.,
and Leong, W.L. (2022). Ionic-Liquid Induced
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1089
Article

Morphology Tuning of PEDOT:PSS for High-
Performance Organic Electrochemical
Transistors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 32, 2108510.
30. Teo, M.Y., RaviChandran, N., Kim, N., Kee, S.,
Stuart, L., Aw, K.C., and Stringer, J. (2019).
Direct Patterning of Highly Conductive
PEDOT:PSS/Ionic Liquid Hydrogel via
Microreactive Inkjet Printing. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 11, 37069–37076.
31. Leaf, M.A., and Muthukumar, M. (2016).
Electrostatic Effect on the Solution Structure
and Dynamics of PEDOT:PSS. Macromolecules
49, 4286–4294.
32. Lu, B., Yuk, H., Lin, S., Jian, N., Qu, K., Xu, J.,
and Zhao, X. (2019). Pure PEDOT:PSS
hydrogels. Nat. Commun. 10, 1043.
33. Feig, V.R., Tran, H., Lee, M., and Bao, Z. (2018).
Mechanically tunable conductive
interpenetrating network hydrogels that mimic
the elastic moduli of biological tissue. Nat.
Commun. 9, 2740.
34. Liu, Y., Liu, J., Chen, S., Lei, T., Kim, Y., Niu, S.,
Wang, H., Wang, X., Foudeh, A.M., Tok, J.B.H.,
and Bao, Z. (2019). Soft and elastic hydrogel-
based microelectronics for localized low-
voltage neuromodulation. Nat. Biomed. Eng.
3, 58–68.
35. Dunstan, D.E. (2019). The viscosity-radius
relationship for concentrated polymer
solutions. Sci. Rep. 9, 543.
36. Geng, W.J., Likos, W.J., and Benson, C.H.
(2016). Viscosity of Polymer-Modiﬁed
Bentonite as a Hydraulic Performance Index.
Geo-Chicago 2016: Sustainable
Geoenvironmental Systems, pp. 498–507.
37. Weissenberger, G., Henderikx, R.J.M., and
Peters, P.J. (2021). Understanding the invisible
hands of sample preparation for cryo-EM. Nat.
Methods 18, 463–471.
38. Jo, Y.J., Kim, S.Y., Hyun, J.H., Park, B.,
Choy, S., Koirala, G.R., and Kim, T.I. (2022).
Fibrillary gelation and dedoping of
PEDOT:PSS ﬁbers for interdigitated organic
electrochemical transistors and circuits. npj
Flex. Electron. 6, 31.
39. Dauzon, E., Mansour, A.E., Niazi, M.R.,
Munir, R., Smilgies, D.M., Sallenave, X.,
Plesse, C., Goubard, F., and Amassian, A.
(2019). Conducting and Stretchable
PEDOT:PSS Electrodes: Role of Additives
on Self-Assembly, Morphology, and
Transport. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11,
17570–17582.
40. Bagchi, D., and Menon, R. (2006).
Conformational modiﬁcation of conducting
polymer chains by solvents: Small-angle X-ray
scattering study. Chem. Phys. Lett. 425,
114–117.
41. Choudhury, P.K., Bagchi, D., Sangeeth, C.S.S.,
and Menon, R. (2011). Modiﬁed conformation
and physical properties in conducting
polymers due to varying conjugation and
solvent interactions. J. Mater. Chem. 21,
1607–1614.
42. Palumbiny, C.M., Liu, F., Russell, T.P., Hexemer,
A., Wang, C., and Mu¨ ller-Buschbaum, P. (2015).
The Crystallization of PEDOT:PSS Polymeric
Electrodes Probed In Situ during Printing. Adv.
Mater. 27, 3391–3397.
43. Kim, N., Kee, S., Lee, S.H., Lee, B.H., Kahng,
Y.H., Jo, Y.R., Kim, B.J., and Lee, K. (2014).
Highly Conductive PEDOT: PSS Nanoﬁbrils
Induced by Solution-Processed Crystallization.
Adv. Mater. 26, 2268–2272. 2109.
44. Dong, J., and Portale, G. (2020). Role of the
Processing Solvent on the Electrical
Conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. Adv. Mater.
Interfac. 7, 2000641.
45. Gangopadhyay, R., Das, B., and Molla, M.R.
(2014). How does PEDOT combine with PSS?
Insights from structural studies. RSC Adv. 4,
43912–43920.
46. Li, Q., Zhou, Q., Xu, W., Wen, L., Li, J.,
Deng, B., Zhang, J., Xu, H., and Liu, W.
(2022). Anion Size Effect of Ionic Liquids
in Tuning the Thermoelectric and
Mechanical Properties of PEDOT:PSS Films
through a Counterion Exchange Strategy.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14, 27911–
27921.
47. Horii, T., Li, Y., Mori, Y., and Okuzaki, H. (2015).
Correlation between the hierarchical structure
and electrical conductivity of PEDOT/PSS.
Polym. J. 47, 695–699.
48. Murphy, R.J., Weigandt, K.M., Uhrig, D.,
Alsayed, A., Badre, C., Hough, L., and
Muthukumar, M. (2015). Scattering Studies on
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-
Polystyrenesulfonate in the Presence of Ionic
Liquids. Macromolecules 48, 8989–8997.
49. Badre, C., Marquant, L., Alsayed, A.M., and
Hough, L.A. (2012). Highly Conductive
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):Poly
(styrenesulfonate) Films Using 1-Ethyl-3-
methylimidazolium Tetracyanoborate
Ionic Liquid. Adv. Funct. Mater. 22,
2723–2727.
50. Li, Q., Deng, M., Zhang, S., Zhao, D., Jiang, Q.,
Guo, C., Zhou, Q., and Liu, W. (2019).
Synergistic enhancement of thermoelectric
and mechanical performances of ionic liquid
LiTFSI modulated PEDOT ﬂexible ﬁlms.
J. Mater. Chem. C Mater. 7, 4374–4381.
51. Crispin, X., Jakobsson, F.L.E., Crispin, A.,
Grim, P.C.M., Andersson, P., Volodin, A.,
van Haesendonck, C., Van der Auweraer,
M., Salaneck, W.R., and Berggren, M.
(2006). The origin of the high
conductivity of poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene)-
poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT- PSS) plastic
electrodes. Chem. Mater. 18, 4354–4360.
52. Alemu, D., Wei, H.Y., Ho, K.C., and Chu, C.W.
(2012). Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS
electrode by simple ﬁlm treatment with
methanol for ITO-free polymer solar cells.
Energy Environ. Sci. 5, 9662–9671.
53. Kozub, D.R., Vakhshouri, K., Orme, L.M.,
Wang, C., Hexemer, A., and Gomez, E.D.
(2011). Polymer Crystallization of Partially
Miscible Polythiophene/Fullerene Mixtures
Controls Morphology. Macromolecules 44,
5722–5726.
54. Kuei, B., Kabius, B., Gray, J.L., and Gomez,
E.D. (2018). Strategies for elemental
mapping from energy-ﬁltered TEM of
polymeric materials. Mrs Communications 8,
1321–1327.
55. Song, X., Gasparini, N., Nahid, M.M., Paleti,
S.H.K., Wang, J.L., Ade, H., and Baran, D.
(2019). Dual Sensitizer and Processing-Aid
Behavior of Donor Enables Efﬁcient Ternary
Organic Solar Cells. Joule 3, 846–857.
56. Peng, Z., Ye, L., and Ade, H. (2022).
Understanding, quantifying, and controlling
the molecular ordering of semiconducting
polymers: from novices to experts and
amorphous to perfect crystals. Mater. Horiz. 9,
577–606.
57. Hosseini, E., Ozhukil Kollath, V., and Karan, K.
(2020). The key mechanism of conductivity in
PEDOT:PSS thin ﬁlms exposed by anomalous
conduction behaviour upon solvent-doping
and sulfuric acid post-treatment. J. Mater.
Chem. C Mater. 8, 3982–3990.
58. Sirringhaus, H., Brown, P.J., Friend, R.H.,
Nielsen, M.M., Bechgaard, K., Langeveld-
Voss, B.M.W., Spiering, A.J.H., Janssen,
R.A.J., Meijer, E.W., Herwig, P., and de
Leeuw, D.M. (1999). Two-dimensional
charge transport in self-organized, high-
mobility conjugated polymers. Nature 401,
685–688.
59. Bidinger, S.L., Han, S., Malliaras, G.G., and
Hasan, T. (2022). Highly stable PEDOT:PSS
electrochemical transistors. Appl. Phys. Lett.
120, 073302.
60. Rivnay, J., Ramuz, M., Leleux, P., Hama, A.,
Huerta, M., and Owens, R.M. (2015). Organic
electrochemical transistors for cell-based
impedance sensing. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106,
043301.
61. Vukmirovic, N. (2013). A comparative study of
electronic properties of disordered conjugated
polymers. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 15,
3543–3551.
62. Wei, Q., Mukaida, M., Naitoh, Y., and Ishida, T.
(2013). Morphological Change and Mobility
Enhancement in PEDOT:PSS by Adding Co-
solvents. Adv. Mater. 25, 2831–2836.
63. Łapkowski, M., and Pron, A. (2000).
Electrochemical oxidation of poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) - "in situ"
conductivity and spectroscopic investigations.
Synth. Met. 110, 79–83.
64. Keene, S.T., Michaels, W., Melianas, A.,
Quill, T.J., Fuller, E.J., Giovannitti, A.,
McCulloch, I., Talin, A.A., Tassone, C.J.,
Qin, J., et al. (2022). Efﬁcient Electronic
Tunneling Governs Transport in Conducting
Polymer-Insulator Blends. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 144, 10368–10376.
65. Lo, C.Y., Wu, Y., Awuyah, E., Meli, D.,
Nguyen, D.M., Wu, R., Xu, B., Strzalka, J.,
Rivnay, J., Martin, D.C., and Kayser, L.V.
(2022). Inﬂuence of the molecular weight
and size distribution of PSS on mixed ionic-
electronic transport in PEDOT:PSS. Polym.
Chem. 13, 2764–2775.
66. Savva, A., Wustoni, S., and Inal, S. (2018). Ionic-
to-electronic coupling efﬁciency in PEDOT:PSS
ﬁlms operated in aqueous electrolytes.
J. Mater. Chem. C Mater. 6, 12023–12030.
67. Ohayon, D., Druet, V., and Inal, S. (2023). A
guide for the characterization of organic
electrochemical transistors and channel
materials. Chem. Soc. Rev. 52, 1001–1023.
ll
1090 Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024
Article

68. Inal, S., Rivnay, J., Suiu, A.O., Malliaras, G.G.,
and McCulloch, I. (2018). Conjugated Polymers
in Bioelectronics. Acc. Chem. Res. 51,
1368–1376.
69. Rivnay, J., Inal, S., Salleo, A., Owens, R.M.,
Berggren, M., and Malliaras, G.G. (2018).
Organic electrochemical transistors. Nat. Rev.
Mater. 3, 17086.
70. Li, P., and Lei, T. (2022). Molecular design
strategies for high-performance organic
electrochemical transistors. J. Polym. Sci. 60,
377–392.
71. Case, D.A., Ben-Shalom, I.Y., Brozell, S.R.,
Cerutti, D.S., Cheatham, T.E., III,
Cruzeiro, V.W.D., Darden, T.A., Duke,
R.E., Ghoreishi, D., Giambasu, G., et al.
(2019). AMBER 2019 (University of
California).
72. Taylor, N.G., Chung, S.H., Kwansa, A.L.,
Johnson, R.R., Teator, A.J., Milliken, N.J.B.,
Koshlap, K.M., Yingling, Y.G., Lee, Y.Z., and
Leibfarth, F.A. (2020). Partially Fluorinated
Copolymers as Oxygen Sensitive(19)F MRI
Agents. Chem. Eur. J. 26, 9982–9990.
ll
Matter 7, 1071–1091, March 6, 2024 1091
Article

