Complex Relationship between Side-Chain Polarity, Conductivity,
and Thermal Stability in Molecularly Doped Conjugated Polymers
Ban Xuan Dong, Christian Nowak, Jonathan W. Onorato, Tengzhou Ma, Jens Niklas, Oleg G. Poluektov,
Garrett Grocke, Mark F. DiTusa, Fernando A. Escobedo, Christine K. Luscombe, Paul F. Nealey,
and Shrayesh N. Patel*
Cite This: Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Molecularly doped conjugated polymers with polar side chains are
an emerging class of conducting materials exhibiting enhanced and thermally stable
conductivity. Here, we study the electronic conductivity (σ) and the corresponding
thermal stability of two polythiophene derivatives comprising oligoethylene glycol
side chains: one having oxygen attached to the thiophene ring (poly(3-
(methoxyethoxyethoxy)thiophene) (P3MEET)) and the other having a methylene
spacer
between
the
oxygen
and
the
thiophene
ring
(poly(3-
(methoxyethoxyethoxymethyl)thiophene) (P3MEEMT)). Thin ﬁlms were
vapor-doped with ﬂuorinated derivatives of tetracyanoquinodimethane (FnTCNQ,
n = 4, 2, 1) to determine the role of dopant strength (electron aﬃnity) in
maximum achievable σ. Speciﬁcally, when vapor doping with F4TCNQ, P3MEET achieved a substantially higher σ of 37.1 ± 10.1 S/
cm compared to a σ of 0.82 ± 0.06 S/cm for P3MEEMT. Structural characterization using a combination of X-ray and optical
spectroscopy reveals that the higher degree of conformational order of polymer chains in the amorphous domain upon doping with
F4TCNQ in P3MEET is a major contributing factor for the higher σ of P3MEET. Additionally, vapor-doped P3MEET exhibited
superior thermal stability compared to P3MEEMT, highlighting that the presence of polar side chains alone does not ensure higher
thermal stability. Molecular dynamics simulations indicate that the dopant−side-chain nonbond energy is lower in the
P3MEET:F4TCNQ mixture, suggesting more favorable dopant−side-chain interaction, which is a factor in improving the thermal
stability of a polymer/dopant pair. Our results reveal that additional factors such as polymer ionization energy and side-chain−
dopant interaction should be taken into account for the design of thermally stable, highly conductive polymers.
1. INTRODUCTION
Conjugated polymers (CPs) have long played a vital role in
advancing the organic electronics ﬁeld owing to their solution
processability, mechanical ﬂexibility, and the tunability of their
optical and electrical properties via facile molecular design/
synthesis strategies.1−6 In many applications such as organic
ﬁeld-eﬀect transistors (OFETs) or organic photovoltaics
(OPVs), doping CPs with molecular dopants has been
increasingly explored to ﬁll traps, improve charge injection,
and improve carrier mobility, which in total improves device
performance.7−11 For organic thermoelectrics, doping is of
particular importance since the physical properties of a
thermoelectric material such as electronic conductivity,
Seebeck coeﬃcient, and thermal conductivity strongly depend
on carrier concentration.12−14 As such, it is critical to explore
strategies that can improve both the doping eﬃciency and
electrical performance for the long-term viability of organic
electronic and organic thermoelectric applications.
Doping CPs is usually performed via the addition of
molecular dopants to either oxidize (p-type doping) or reduce
(n-type doping) the conjugated backbone. One of the most
common strategies to improve electronic conductivity (σ) is
through the doping method. Sequential doping methods in
which prefabricated polymer thin ﬁlms are exposed to the
dopant in the vapor or solution phase15−21 have been shown to
give superior σ compared to the solution coprocessing
method22,23 in which the samples are cast from mixed
polymer/dopant solutions. The enhanced performance in
samples doped by sequential methods is largely due to the
preservation of the underlying structure of the CPs, whereas in
the solution coprocessing method, the aggregation of the
doped polymers in solution before casting generally results in
ﬁlms with poor quality and low σ. For example, sequential
doping of CPs such as poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)17,19 or
poly[2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]-
thiophene] (PBTTT)24,25 with a small molecule acceptor
2,3,5,6-tetraﬂuoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane
Received:
October 27, 2020
Revised:
December 16, 2020
Published: January 6, 2021
Article
pubs.acs.org/cm
© 2021 American Chemical Society
741
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
Downloaded via UNIV OF CHICAGO on June 30, 2021 at 23:48:59 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

(F4TCNQ) can result in values of σ several orders of
magnitude higher than the solution coprocessing method. In
addition to changing the doping method, σ can be enhanced
by processing ﬁlms with a high degree of crystallinity,20,26
controlling crystallite orientation,27 or using polymers with
intrinsically higher carrier mobility.24,28,29 Recently, using a
combination of the sequential doping method and crystallite
orientation control, Brinkmann and co-workers achieved a σ of
2 × 105 S/cm in aligned PBTTT, a record conductivity for
modern solution-processable semiconducting polymers.30
While considerable eﬀorts have been made to signiﬁcantly
improve the σ of molecularly doped CPs, a certain drawback is
their thermally unstable conductivity. It has been reported that
F4TCNQ-doped organic semiconductors are thermally un-
stable, and σ signiﬁcantly decreases when the samples are
heated above 90 °C through the sublimation-mediated loss of
F4TCNQ either in an inert or ambient air environment.31,32
Therefore, to enable the use of molecularly doped CPs in
applications operating at elevated temperatures, as is the case
for thermoelectrics, eﬀorts must also be devoted to circum-
venting the thermal stability issue of the polymer and dopant
pair. To date, a handful of reports directly addressing the
thermal stability issues of doped CPs have been published. Li
et al. showed that by encapsulating doped samples, the
sublimation of F4TCNQ can be signiﬁcantly suppressed even
upon heating to 100 °C.33 Yamashita et al. exchanged the
F4TCNQ−anion in F4TCNQ-doped PBTTT with anions
provided by an ionic liquid solvent and observed a signiﬁcant
enhancement in σ and thermal stability in the case of exchange
with hydrophobic closed-shell anions.34 One potentially
important approach that is being increasingly used is polar
side-chain engineering. Several reports31,35,36 demonstrated the
use of polythiophene derivatives bearing oligoethylene glycol
polar side chains to achieving high conductivity up to 100 S/
cm upon doping with F4TCNQ and high thermal stability up
to 150 °C, even in air. While these studies have shown the role
of polar side chains in improving the thermal stability of
electronic conductivity for molecularly doped polymers, a
fundamental question on the nature of the enhancement
remains: is it simply the presence of side chains with a polar
character that enhances stability or whether other additional
factors are in play?
To explore this question, we synthesize two polythiophene
derivatives, poly(3-(methoxyethoxyethoxy)thiophene)
(P3MEET) and poly(3-(methoxyethoxyethoxymethyl)-
thiophene) (P3MEEMT) (Figure 1a), and measure σ and
their thermal stability after vapor doping with ﬂuorinated
derivatives of tetracyanoquinodimethane (FnTCNQ, n = 4, 2,
1). While both polymers have polar oligoethylene glycol polar
side chains, the key diﬀerence between them is that the oxygen
is directly attached to the thiophene rings in P3MEET, while
its analogue P3MEEMT has a methylene spacer between the
oxygen and the thiophene ring. In the ﬁrst part of the paper, we
report on the measured σ of both polymers after vapor doping
FnTCNQ and the connection between the ionization energy
(IE) of the polymer and the varying electron aﬃnity (EA) of
the dopants. Despite possessing almost identical side-chain
chemistry, P3MEET exhibits room-temperature σ as high as 37
S/cm upon doping with F4TCNQ vapor, which is ca. 50 times
higher than those of F4TCNQ-doped P3MEEMT samples. In
the second part of the paper, we investigate the origin of the
observed higher electronic conductivity of P3MEET:F4TCNQ
through a combination of X-ray scattering and molecular
spectroscopy techniques (UV−vis−near-infrared (NIR), elec-
tron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), and Raman) comple-
mented with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The
analysis reveals the role of charge carrier concentration and
conformational order of the polymers as factors in enhancing
σ. In the third and ﬁnal part of the paper, we report on the
thermal stability of σ of vapor-doped thin ﬁlms. P3MEET
exhibits superior thermal stability with all three dopants
compared to P3MEEMT despite both containing oligo-
ethylene glycol polar side chains. This diﬀerence in thermal
stability highlights that the presence of polar side chains alone
does not impart stability in electronic conductivity at elevated
temperatures and thus other factors may be in play.
2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
2.1. Chemistry and Optical Spectra of P3MEET and
P3MEEMT. Both P3MEET and P3MEEMT are synthesized
using Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization (KCTP), as
shown in the Supporting Information (SI) and detailed in our
previous publication.37 The molecular weights (Mn) are 9.2
and 11.2 kg/mol, the dispersity (Đ) values are 1.4 and 1.5, and
the regioregularity (RR) values are 95 and 94% for P3MEET
and P3MEEMT, respectively. The similarities between Mn, Đ,
and RR of both polymers imply that any diﬀerences arising
from the two polymers will most likely originate from the
diﬀerence in side-chain chemistry. Thin ﬁlms of ca. 50 nm of
P3MEET and P3MEEMT were fabricated by spin-casting
polymer solutions in chloroform and acetonitrile, respectively.
The absorption spectra of P3MEET and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms
are shown in Figure 1b. In the case of P3MEET, having the
oxygen atom right next to the polythiophene backbone results
in a marked red shift of the main absorption feature compared
to P3MEEMT. This shift is due to the electron-donating ability
of the oxygen atom to the thiophene core, which reduces the
Figure 1. (a) Chemical structures of P3MEET and P3MEEMT. (b)
Normalized UV−vis absorption spectra of undoped/neat P3MEET
and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms fabricated by the spin-casting method.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
742

ionization energy (IE) and lowers the band gap of P3MEET,
similar to previous observations in the literature.35,38 Notably,
we observe the signature of polaron absorption peaks in neat
P3MEET across several batches that we synthesized, as
indicated by the red arrows in Figure 1b. The same feature
is absent in P3MEEMT, even though both polymers were
synthesized and handled in almost identical ways. The
appearance of the polaron peak in the neat P3MEET thin
ﬁlm indicates that P3MEET is “intrinsically” charged. This
observation most likely originates from the low ionization
energy of P3MEET, which makes this polymer prone to
oxidation from ambient air during the synthesis and handling
processes. This leads to higher “intrinsic” carrier concentration
and conductivity, as will be discussed in the next section.
2.2. Electronic Conductivity of Films Vapor Doped
with Fluorinated Derivatives of TCNQ. Cyclic voltamme-
try (CV) was used to quantify the approximate ionization
energies (IEs) of both P3MEEMT and P3MEET thin ﬁlms
(Figure S2a). The IE of P3MEET is 4.92 eV and the IE of
P3MEEMT is 5.45 eV. The electronic conductivity (σ) of
P3MEET and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms were controlled through
the addition of ﬂuorinated derivatives of tetracyanoquinodi-
methane molecular dopant molecules. These include 2,3,5,6-
tetraﬂuoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ), 2,5-
diﬂuoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F2TCNQ), and 2-
ﬂuoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F1TCNQ), where
the ﬂuorination level controls the electron aﬃnity (EA).
Solution CV measurements quantiﬁed approximate EA values
for F4TCNQ, F2TCNQ, and F1TCNQ to be 5.25 eV, 5.1 eV,
and 5.01 eV, respectively (Figure S2b). Expectedly, the EA
decreases with decreasing ﬂuorination level.39 The IEs of
P3MEET and P3MEEMT, together with the chemical
structures and EAs of the three dopants, are shown in Figure
2a.
To introduce molecular dopants into the host polymer, the
vapor doping method was employed where one ﬁrst casts a
thin ﬁlm and then inﬁltrates the dopant from the vapor phase,
as illustrated in Figure 2b. After 20 min of doping, the dopant
is found to fully penetrate through the ﬁlm thickness for both
polymers, as demonstrated by the grazing-incidence wide-angle
X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) depth proﬁle experiments (Figure
S6). The details of the vapor doping process are provided in
Section 4. The lateral, in-plane σ of both polymers as a
function of FnTCNQ (n = 4, 2, and 1) vapor doping time is
shown in Figure 2c. Upon vapor doping with FnTCNQ, the σ
of P3MEET and P3MEEMT signiﬁcantly increases and levels
out at ca. 10 min. The plateau σ of P3MEET is 37.1 ± 10.1,
24.9 ± 0.8, and 20.1 ± 0.2 S/cm for F4TCNQ, F2TCNQ, and
F1TCNQ vapor-doped ﬁlms, respectively. While the σ of
P3MEET slightly increases with the ﬂuorination level of the
dopant, it is notable that σ is within the same order of
magnitude. For reference, the σ of P3MEET:F4TCNQ is
comparable to the σ of F4TCNQ-doped p(g42T-T), a
polythiophene derivative bearing polar tetraethylene glycol
side chains as reported by Kroon et al.35 For P3MEEMT, the
plateau σ is 0.82 ± 0.06 and 1.6 × 10−3 S/cm for F4TCNQ and
F2TCNQ vapor-doped ﬁlms, respectively, while the σ of
F1TCNQ vapor-doped was too low to be measured (within
experimental limitations). Overall, P3MEEMT exhibits sub-
stantially lower σ compared to P3MEET. Moreover, the σ of
P3MEEMT increases signiﬁcantly with the ﬂuorination level of
the dopant, which is in stark contrast to P3MEET.
The trends in σ for vapor-doped polymers can be further
explained through the comparison between the IE of the
polymer and the EA of the dopant. As a ﬁrst approximation,
one can take the diﬀerence IE −EA to determine the
propensity of charge transfer between the polymer and the
dopant. IE −EA < 0 indicates that electron transfer is
energetically favorable, while IE −EA > 0 indicates that
electron transfer is energetically prohibitive. This comparison
suggests that all three dopants are energetically favorable for
charge transfer with P3MEET, which is consistent with σ being
within the same order of magnitude with all three dopants. On
the other hand, the greater than 0 diﬀerence between IE and
EA suggests that all three dopants are energetically prohibitive
for charge transfer with P3MEEMT. Despite this, measurable
electronic conduction was observed with F4TCNQ and
F2TCNQ vapor-doped ﬁlms of P3MEEMT. These results
highlight that considering the diﬀerence between IE and EA as
the charge-transfer driving force is only an approximation and
that other factors must also be considered. For instance, recent
evidence suggests that the EA of a p-type molecular dopant
strongly depends on the molecular host due to intermolecular
electrostatic interactions.40 Moreover, it is important to note
that the values of IE and EA are sensitive to the experimental
Figure 2. (a) Ionization energies (IEs) of P3MEET and P3MEEMT
together with the electron aﬃnities (EAs) of the three dopants
F1TCNQ, F2TCNQ, and F4TCNQ used in this work. (b) Schematic
representation of the vapor doping process. (c) Electronic
conductivity of both polymers as a function of vapor doping time.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
743

methods (cyclic voltammetry or photoelectron spectroscopy)
or computational methods employed, and thus, the reported
values
are
merely
estimations.
The
results
of
P3MEEMT:FnTCNQ presented here reiterates that point. In
the next section, we only focused on F4TCNQ for all
subsequent experiments, as it is shown to be the most eﬃcient
dopant for both P3MEET and P3MEEMT.
2.3. UV−Vis−NIR and EPR Spectroscopy Reveal the
Extent of F4TCNQ Doping. To study the extent of doping
and the charge carrier generation process, UV−vis−NIR
absorption spectroscopy was performed as a function of
F4TCNQ doping time for P3MEET and P3MEEMT, as shown
in Figure 3a,b, respectively. After vapor doping, we observe
changes in the intensity of multiple relevant absorption peaks,
as indicated by the arrows in Figure 3a,b. For both polymers,
the intensities of the absorption peaks of neutral F4TCNQ (ca.
390 nm), F4TCNQ anions (ca. 700 nm), and polaron (ca.
2500 nm) increase, whereas the primary polymer absorption
peak decreases (ca. 490 nm for P3MEEMT and ca. 640 nm for
P3MEET). The appearance of the F4TCNQ anion absorption
peak is indicative of the integer charge transfer (ICT) doping
mechanism.41−43 As discussed earlier, polaron peaks were
observed in neat P3MEET thin ﬁlms. The absorption feature
of neat F4TCNQ most likely originates from the excess
amount of vapor dopant either within the polymer ﬁlm or
accumulated on top of the ﬁlm after extended doping.
Although the general trend is similar for both polymers, we
observe some diﬀerences between P3MEET and P3MEEMT.
The intensity of the polaron absorption peak in P3MEET
gradually increases up until 20 min and slightly decreases at 30
min of doping. The polaron peak of P3MEEMT, on the other
hand, is found to saturate faster after several minutes of doping.
Since the intensity of the polaron peak indicates the degree of
ionization of the polymer backbone, this observation indicates
a higher degree of doping in P3MEET compared to that in
P3MEEMT, which is in good agreement with higher σ in
P3MEET. We attempted to deconvolute the absorption
spectra to individual absorption peaks for a more rigorous
assessment of doping level absorption peaks.35,42 Peak
deconvolution proved to be diﬃcult since strong peak
overlapping
in
our
F4TCNQ-doped
P3MEET
and
P3MEEMT systems prevented us from ﬁnding an accurate
solution for the ﬁt. However, since the polaron peak near 2500
nm is suﬃciently far away from other absorption peaks, we
qualitatively conclude that the doping eﬃciency is slightly
higher in P3MEET.
The spin concentration was measured using electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to approximate
the charge carrier concentration F4TCNQ-doped P3MEET
and P3MEEMT. The continuous-wave (CW) X-band EPR
spectra for P3MEET and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms vapor doped
with F4TCNQ are shown in Figure S7. The spin concentration
of each sample was calculated through double integration of
the EPR spectrum, and the volume of the measured ﬁlm
(Figure 3c). The spin concentration of neat P3MEET is (2.1 ±
0.4) × 1018 cm−3, which is about an order of magnitude higher
than the spin concentration (1.3 ± 0.3) × 1017 cm−3 of
P3MEEMT. The higher initial spin concentration for neat
P3MEET is consistent with the observation of polaron
formation through UV−vis−NIR. After vapor doping with
F4TCNQ, the spin concentration increases for both polymers.
At 10 min, the maximum spin concentration of P3MEET is
(1.6 ± 0.3) × 1020 cm−3, which is 45% higher than the
maximum spin concentration (1.1 ± 0.2) × 1020 cm−3 of
P3MEEMT. This diﬀerence suggests better F4TCNQ doping
eﬃciency in P3MEET.
The electronic conductivity σ is a function of charge carrier
concentration n and carrier mobility μ according to σ = qnμ,
where q = 1.6 × 10−19 C is the elementary charge. Therefore,
the diﬀerence in conductivity between the two polymers may
Figure 3. Evolution of UV−vis−NIR absorption spectra as a function of F4TCNQ doping time for (a) P3MEET and (b) P3MEEMT. (c) Carrier
(spin) concentration calculated from EPR spectra (see the SI) as a function of F4TCNQ doping time for both polymers. (d) Estimated carrier
mobility from carrier (spin) concentration and conductivity as a function of F4TCNQ doping time.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
744

originate from the diﬀerences in n and μ. As shown in Figure
3d, the estimation of apparent charge mobility (μ) was
calculated as a function of F4TCNQ doping time using the
measured value of σ (Figure 2c) and spin concentration
(Figure 3c) as the value for n. For the neat ﬁlms, μ for
P3MEET is (1.63 ± 0.42) × 10−5 cm2/(V s), which is higher
than μ = (5.73 ± 1.65) × 10−6 cm2/(V s) for P3MEEMT,
whereas in the saturation regime, the carrier mobility is
signiﬁcantly higher in P3MEET (1.57 ± 0.53 cm2/(V s) in
P3MEET vs (6.07 ± 1.30) × 10−2 cm2/(V s) in P3MEEMT in
fully doped samples).
Note that the carrier concentration does not strictly scale
linearly with electronic conductivity probably due to the
presence of density of states in disordered polymeric
semiconductors, which gives rise to mobile and immobile
carriers.44,45 The total amount of carriers measured by EPR
thus does not necessarily reﬂect the amount of mobile carriers
that contribute to conductivity. Moreover, in addition to the
carriers generated from polarons on the polymers, there are
also other types of paramagnetic species that could be detected
by EPR such as “intrinsic” carrier concentration or F4TCNQ
radical anion.36 It is possible that these types of carriers do not
contribute equally to charge transport. Distinguishing the
diﬀerent transport mechanisms for these types of carriers is out
of scope for this study.
2.4. GIWAXS and MD Simulations Show Changes in
Local Ordering upon Vapor Doping. To characterize the
inﬂuence of vapor doping on the local order, grazing-incidence
wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was performed on
P3MEET:F4TCNQ and P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ thin ﬁlms.
Shown in Figure 4a−d are two-dimensional (2D) GIWAXS
images of P3MEET and P3MEEMT before and after doping
with F4TCNQ for 10 min. Two-dimensional GIWAXS images
of ﬁlms doped at diﬀerent times can be found in the SI (Figure
S3). The scattering patterns of neat P3MEET and P3MEEMT
appear qualitatively similar and show relevant reﬂections from
side-chain stacking (100) and π−π stacking (010) scattering
planes. These reﬂections also appear in both the horizontal and
vertical directions, indicating a mixed face-on/edge-on
orientation of polymer crystallites. Additionally, the weak
higher-order scattering reﬂections and diﬀuse scattering
indicate a microstructure of aggregate and disordered domains.
After vapor doping with F4TCNQ, the 2D GIWAXS images of
both polymers appear qualitatively similar to the neat ﬁlms.
One noticeable diﬀerence is the appearance of new diﬀraction
spots (indicated by red arrows) for the P3MEEMT sample
arising from the accumulation of neutral F4TCNQ on the
surface of the polymer ﬁlm. Notably, despite the weakly
aggregated
microstructure,
the
conductivity
of
P3MEET:F4TCNQ is high.
To provide a more quantitative picture of the structural
evolution upon vapor doping with F4TCNQ, the relative
degree of crystallinity (rDoC) was estimated using a partial
pole ﬁgure construction method on the (100) reﬂection, as
shown in Figure S4 and described elsewhere.37,46,47 For each
vapor-doped sample, the rDoC is normalized to the rDoC of
the neat thin ﬁlm. Shown in Figure 4e is the normalized rDoC
of P3MEET and P3MEEMT as a function of F4TCNQ vapor
doping time. For both polymers, the inﬁltration of F4TCNQ is
found to decrease the rDoC of both polymers. After 20 min of
doping, the rDoC of P3MEET is ca. 13% compared to that of
the neat sample, whereas the rDoC of P3MEEMT is ca. 20%.
Here, it is worth noting that for the same vapor doping time,
the estimated rDoC of P3MEEMT samples is always higher
than P3MEET, indicating that the addition of F4TCNQ vapor
to P3MEET has a stronger impact on the polymer crystallinity
as compared to P3MEEMT. The lower rDoC of P3MEET
samples indicates that the change in crystallinity upon
introducing the vapor dopant is likely not the origin of the
higher σ in P3MEET compared to P3MEEMT.26
To further compare the inﬂuence of side-chain chemistry on
the polymer−dopant interaction, the side-chain distance d100 =
2π/q100 was calculated as a function of F4TCNQ doping time
(Figure 4f). The value of d100 of both polymers increases due
to the intercalation of the F4TCNQ anion into the side-chain
region of the aggregate domains, which has been previously
observed in other polythiophene-based polymers.20,26,43 For
P3MEEMT, d100 increases initially from 1.89 to 2.04 nm but
plateaus beyond ca. 10 min of doping. The side-chain distance
of neat P3MEET is 1.42 nm, which is smaller than P3MEEMT
as expected. Upon introducing F4TCNQ, the P3MEET side-
chain distance continuously increases, with the largest distance
of 1.83 nm occurring after 20 min of doping.
Figure 4. (a−d) Representative GIWAXS patterns of P3MEET and
P3MEEMT before and after doping with F4TCNQ for 10 min.
GIWAXS patterns of the polymers at other doping times are shown in
the SI. The red arrows indicate diﬀraction signals of F4TCNQ crystals.
Evolution of (e) relative degree of crystallinity (rDoC), (f) side-chain
distance, (g) π-stacking distance, and (h) crystallite coherence length
(CCL) along the π-stacking direction upon vapor doping with
F4TCNQ.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
745

Since electronic transport in conjugated polymers strongly
depends on π−π interaction between polymer chains, we
investigate the π-stacking distance d010 and crystallite
coherence length (CCL) along the π-stacking direction of
both polymers upon doping. As shown in Figure 4g, for both
polymers, d010 is found to decrease upon doping. The decrease
in the π-stacking distance upon doping is also a widely
observed phenomenon for electrochemically and molecularly
doped conjugated polymers.26,43,48−51 While the intercalation
of F4TCNQ into the π-stacks was suggested in early
studies,17,43,52 recent experimental evidence has questioned
this hypothesis due to the weak localization of polaron and the
lack of X-ray diﬀraction signals from F4TCNQ-conjugated
segment cocrystals.26 Additionally, the change in π−π spacing
was not observed upon blending conjugated polymers with
redox nonactive species such as TCNQ or LiTFSI,37 implying
that reduction of the π-stacking distance is not due to the
expansion in the side-chain direction but rather relating to the
doping process itself. Therefore, it has been proposed that
doping-induced polaron delocalization between adjacent
chains leads to attractive forces that reduce π−π spacing
between adjacent chains.53 It would thus follow that d010
decreases upon doping for both P3MEET and P3MEEMT.
The ﬁnal plateau π-stacking distance is lower in P3MEET
compared to that in P3MEEMT, which arises from diﬀerences
in the degree of ionization of the conjugated backbone.
The CCL along the π-stacking direction as calculated from
the full width at half-maximum using the Scherrer equation is
shown in Figure 4h. While there is no clear trend of CCL as a
function of F4TCNQ doping time, the CCL of P3MEEMT is
always higher than that of P3MEET. The CCL of P3MEEMT
corresponds to an average of ∼7 π-stacking units, whereas the
average π-stacking units in P3MEET is ∼5. This observation
suggests that P3MEEMT possesses higher degree of order in
the π-stacking direction, consistent with prior observations
from diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements
that indicate that P3MEEMT is more crystalline than
P3MEET.37,54 The lower π−π CCL of P3MEET samples
also indicates that the diﬀerence in CCL of the two polymers is
likely not the origin of the higher σ in P3MEET compared to
that in P3MEEMT.
To gather additional details of the polymer crystallite−
dopant interaction, we employ MD simulations to investigate
the neutral dopant distribution within P3MEET and
P3MEEMT crystallites. A complete description of our
computational methods is given in the SI. Here, we speciﬁcally
look to see how each P3MEET and P3MEEMT crystalline
system responds to the addition of neutral F4TCNQ. We note
that a rigorous investigation of semicrystalline polymer/dopant
interactions should involve a study on a system with (i)
coexisting crystalline and amorphous domains and (ii) ionized
species (polarons and dopant anions) generated by the
F4TCNQ dopant, whose electrostatic interactions will be
diﬀerent from those in neutral polymer/neutral dopant
systems. Unfortunately, simulations involving coexisting
crystal−amorphous phases and ionized species entail very
challenging undertakings, which are beyond the scope of this
work. Nevertheless, we expect that the results from this MD
investigation of the polymer crystallite/neutral dopant
interaction can still provide insight into some of the underlying
reasons for the diﬀerences in electrical performances of
P3MEET and P3MEEMT as discussed below and elsewhere
in this work.
To simulate crystalline systems of P3MEET and
P3MEEMT, we follow our previously described procedures,
which used the initial conﬁguration equivalent to the
crystalline structure of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)
(isomorph I) except that the crystals of both P3MEET and
P3MEEMT were expanded to accommodate the longer side
chains.37 We then perform reverse coarse-graining to generate
all-atom conﬁgurations from equilibrated coarse-graining
conﬁgurations and subsequently add neutral F4TCNQ at
diﬀerent concentrations of NF4TCNQ. Here, NF4TCNQ is the
number of F4TCNQ molecules per repeating monomer unit.
Additional details of the simulation can be found in the SI and
also in our previous publication.37 The chemical representa-
tions of both polymers and F4TCNQ are shown in Figure 5a.
Figure 5b provides representative snapshots of the P3MEET−
F4TCNQ crystalline system at concentration NF4TCNQ =
0.0625. The corresponding snapshot of the P3MEEMT−
F4TCNQ system appears qualitatively similar and thus is not
shown. Importantly, F4TCNQ is found to be well dispersed
within the P3MEET crystalline matrix, residing exclusively
within the side-chain region. No F4TCNQ is found between
the π-stacks, consistent with our conclusion from GIWAXS
experimental data. We show in Figure 5c the evolution of
crystallite width along the side-chain spacing distance as a
function of F4TCNQ concentration. For both P3MEET and
Figure 5. (a) Representation of P3MEET, P3MEEMT, and F4TCNQ chemical structures used in MD simulations. (b) Exemplary snapshot of
F4TCNQ molecules dispersed within a crystalline domain of P3MEET at a concentration NF4TCNQ = 0.0625. The snapshot of the P3MEEMT−
F4TCNQ structure appears similar and thus is not shown. (c) MD simulation results of crystallite width along the side-chain direction as a function
of F4TCNQ concentration.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
746

P3MEEMT systems, we observe that the side-chain spacing
distance calculated from our MD simulations monotonically
increases with increasing neutral F4TCNQ loading, in clear
contrast with the experimental data shown in Figure 4f. This
behavior is expected as our model only consists of the
crystalline phase so that the extra added amount of F4TCNQ
cannot escape into the amorphous phase like the real system
and is bound to swell the crystal.
2.5. Raman Spectroscopy Reveals That Extent of
Conformational Order Controls the Limits of Electronic
Conductivity. Since GIWAXS measurement is only sensitive
to ordered domains, information about the amorphous domain
before and after doping is not visible by GIWAXS. Considering
charge carriers must traverse both aggregate (crystalline) and
disordered domains, the amorphous fraction in both P3MEET
and P3MEEMT should also play a large role in dictating the
limits of macroscopic conductivity. To gain insight into chain
conformation in the amorphous domain upon doping, we
performed Raman spectroscopy on vapor-doped P3MEET and
P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms. To probe the amorphous part of the
samples, the excitation wavelength was selected to be in
resonance with the amorphous fraction of the thin ﬁlm,55,56
i.e., 532 nm for P3MEET and 473 nm for P3MEEMT. The
selection of appropriate wavelength was based on the UV−vis
absorption spectra of both the solution and thin ﬁlm, as
depicted and explained in Figure S9.
The normalized Raman spectra of neat and vapor-doped
P3MEET and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms are shown in Figure 6a,b,
respectively. The peak at 1445 cm−1 for P3MEET and the peak
at 1466 cm−1 for P3MEEMT correspond to the intraring
symmetric CC vibrational modes. Here, the Raman spectra
were normalized by the intensity of this primary CC
vibrational mode. Additionally, the peak at 1381 cm−1 for
P3MEET and the weak peak near 1380 cm−1 for P3MEEMT
correspond to the intraring C−C vibrational mode. Upon
closer inspection, besides the main peak near 1445 cm−1,
P3MEET’s symmetric CC vibration mode also consists of a
small shoulder near 1416 cm−1, as indicated by the red arrows
in Figure 6a. As reported for P3HT, a decrease in the
wavenumber of the CC mode arises from neutral polymer
chains with increased conformational order (i.e., stiﬀer and
more planar chains).55,57 In turn, the vibrational mode at 1416
cm−1 in P3MEET likely arises from the stiﬀening of disordered
polymer chains in the amorphous regime, whereas the
vibrational mode at 1445 cm−1 corresponds to polymer chains
with a relatively higher degree of conformational order. As a
note of reminder, neat P3MEET exhibits polaron formation.
Therefore, we attribute the red shift of the main CC
vibration peak in neat P3MEET compared to neat P3MEEMT
(note that the dashed lines in Figure 6a,b are placed at the
same position for ease of comparison) and together with the
appearance of a shoulder near 1416 cm−1 to the increased
planarity of the polaronic (quinoidal) molecular structure. This
is further emphasized by an increase in the relative intensity of
the vibrational mode at 1416 cm−1 in P3MEET after vapor
doping with F4TCNQ where the concentration of polarons
increases.
With respect to P3MEEMT, we observe a red shift of the
broad peak at 1466 cm−1, where the shift could stem from the
planarization of the polymer backbone upon increasing
polaron concentration. However, the ﬁnal peak position of
P3MEEMT at 10 min of doping is 1461 cm−1, which is still
higher in wavenumber compared to that of P3MEET,
indicating a lower degree of backbone planarization in
P3MEEMT. Additionally, a similar shoulder near 1416 cm−1
is not observed in P3MEEMT after doping, suggesting the
ineﬃcient doping of the amorphous part of P3MEEMT
compared to amorphous P3MEET. This diﬀerence could be
explained by considering the energy mismatch between the
polymers and F4TCNQ. Due to its highly disordered structure,
the amorphous part of the semicrystalline conjugated polymers
possesses a lower value of IE, rendering it more diﬃcult for p-
type charge transfer to occur between the disorded polymer
chains and molecular dopants. Therefore, while charge transfer
can occur between the polymer crystallite and F4TCNQ in
P3MEEMT, a similar process is not likely to happen in the
amorphous regime. In contrast, due to its low IE, charge
transfer can still occur between amorphous P3MEET and
F4TCNQ, evident by the stiﬀening of the polymer chains in
the amorphous domain as demonstrated by Raman measure-
ments here. Therefore, stiﬀer polymer chains in the amorphous
domain permitting higher mobility coupled with the higher
carrier concentration accounts for the higher conductivity of
P3MEET:F4TCNQ compared to that of P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ
thin ﬁlms.
2.6. Thermal Stability of Polymer/Dopant Pairs. In
addition to high conductivity, the utility of molecularly doped
conjugated polymers depends on the polymer’s ability to
maintain its conductivity at elevated temperatures. Thus, in the
ﬁnal set of experiments, we investigate the thermal stability of
vapor-doped polymer thin ﬁlms in argon and air by measuring
the temporal stability of the conductivity at a suﬃciently
elevated temperature of 130 °C. Shown in Figure 7a is the
evolution of conductivity of F4TCNQ vapor-doped ﬁlms (10
Figure 6. Raman spectra of (a) P3MEET and (b) P3MEEMT at diﬀerent F4TCNQ doping times. The arrows in (a) denote the Raman signal from
stiﬀened amorphous chains. The vertical dashed lines in both plots are placed at the same Raman shift for ease of peak position comparison.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
747

min) of P3MEET, P3MEEMT, and P3HT as a function of
heating time in an argon glovebox. As shown in Figure 7a, after
15 min of heating at 130 °C, the P3MEET:F4TCNQ sample
exhibits only a 1% decrease in conductivity, whereas the
P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ sample exhibits 8 orders of magnitude
drop in conductivity. For comparison to a nonpolar side chain,
we included an F4TCNQ-doped P3HT sample, which showed
a 75% drop in conductivity after 15 min of annealing and is
thus more thermally stable than P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ. These
results emphasize that only adding polar character to the side
chain does not impart thermal stability of the conductivity and
can in fact reduce the stability. With respect to other molecular
dopants, P3MEET vapor doped with F2TCNQ and F1TCNQ
yielded a similar level of thermal stability to F4TCNQ-doped
ﬁlms, as demonstrated in Figure 7b. Upon closer examination
(see the inset of Figure 7b), we found decreases of 4 and 9% in
conductivity for P3MEET:F2TCNQ and P3MEET:F1TCNQ,
respectively. These numbers are very close to the thermal
stability of the P3MEET:F4TCNQ sample (showed a 1% drop
in conductivity under identical conditions) and substantially
higher than P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ and P3HT:F4TCNQ
samples. These results indicate that the thermal stability is
insensitive to the magnitude of diﬀerences between the IE and
EA with F2TCNQ and F1TCNQ and consistent with the fact
that F2TCNQ and F1TCNQ are eﬃcient dopants for
P3MEET.
To further demonstrate the superior thermal stability of
P3MEET:F4TCNQ, heating experiments were performed in an
ambient
air
environment.
The
conductivity
of
P3MEET:F4TCNQ exhibited a decrease of ca. 6% at 130 °C
after 15 min (Figure S8). Additionally, the conductivity
decreased ca. 0.5, 9, and 11% after heating at 100, 150, and 180
°C, respectively (Figure S8). The superior thermal stability of
P3MEET:F4TCNQ in air is similar to the results of Kroon et
al., where the same oligoethylene glycol side chains bearing
polythiophene, p(g42T-T):F4TCNQ, was shown to have much
better thermal stability compared to P3HT:F4TCNQ.31,35 The
authors suggested that the thermal stability of p(g42T-
T):F4TCNQ originated from the enhanced “binding” between
the oligoethylene glycol side chain and F4TCNQ. However,
despite possessing a nearly identical side chain to P3MEET,
the P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ ﬁlm shows much inferior thermal
stability. Moreover, the P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ ﬁlm exhibits less
stability
to
purely
aliphatic-side-chain-containing
P3HT:F4TCNQ ﬁlms. In air, the conductivity of
P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ decreases by almost 9 orders of
magnitude only after 5 min of annealing. Indeed, there has
been a recent report showing that bearing a polar side chain is
not necessarily responsible for the enhanced thermal stability
of molecularly doped CPs.58 These results suggest additional
factors are responsible for the improved thermal stability in
thiophene-based polymers bearing polar sides chains such as
our P3MEET and reported p(g42T-T):F4TCNQ-doped
samples.
To determine whether the decrease in conductivity upon
heating was from the sublimation of dopant molecules, we
performed thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) experiments on
neat P3MEET and P3MEEMT, F4TCNQ powder, and
P3MEET and P3MEEMT samples blended with ca. 25 wt %
F4TCNQ. As seen in Figure 7c, neat P3MEET and P3MEEMT
show almost identical TGA proﬁles, with the majority of
weight loss occurring at temperatures above 350 °C due to the
degradation of the polymers. On the other hand, F4TCNQ
shows an onset of weight loss around 200 °C arising from the
sublimation of F4TCNQ.20 For the P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ
blend, we observe an early onset of weight loss at 100 °C. The
weight loss likely arises from the sublimation of F4TCNQ
molecules after returning to their neutral state due to the
instability of the charge state of the P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ
blend. The lower sublimation temperature of F4TCNQ in the
blend arises from diﬀerences in the sublimation behavior of a
powder and when embedded in a polymer matrix. Overall, the
return to the neutral state and sublimation of F4TCNQ leads
to a decrease in the conductivity of P3MEET:F4TCNQ when
heating at elevated temperatures. In stark contrast, the
P3MEET:F4TCNQ blend shows superior thermal stability
where the weight loss occurs within the 300−400 °C range.
Figure 7. (a) Electronic conductivity of F4TCNQ-doped P3MEET,
P3MEEMT, and P3HT as a function of isothermal annealing time at
130 °C in argon. (b) Electronic conductivity of F4TCNQ-, F2TCNQ-,
and F1TCNQ-doped P3MEET as a function of isothermal annealing
time at 130 °C in argon. The conductivity was measured on ﬁlms
deposited atop interdigitated electrode (IDE) devices. The inset
ﬁgure shows the zoom-in plot of the same thermal stability data. (c)
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) data of P3MEET, P3MEEMT,
and F4TCNQ together with P3MEEMT and P3MEET samples
blended with ca. 25 wt % F4TCNQ. The dashed line represents this
25 wt % from F4TCNQ.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
748

The lack of weight loss near the sublimation temperature of
neutral F4TCNQ indicates that P3MEET:F4TCNQ remains in
the charged state. Therefore, the charged species (P3MEET
positive polarons and F4TCNQ anions) exhibit higher thermal
stability compared to the neutral molecules and thus allows for
stable conductivity when heated at elevated temperatures.
Multiple factors likely explain the diﬀerence in thermal
stability of P3MEET:F4TCNQ and P3MEEMT:F4TCNQ
pairs. One possible explanation for this behavior is the shift
in the ionization energy of P3MEET compared to that of
P3MEEMT, which not only facilitates the doping process but
in turn hinders dedoping due to the large oﬀset between IE of
P3MEET and EA of F4TCNQ. In other words, the electron-
donating ability of the oxygen directly attached to the
thiophene ring in P3MEET stabilizes the polaron upon
doping, enhancing the stability of the P3MEET:F4TCNQ
system. Alternatively, another possible explanation relates to
the side-chain segmental mobility. In our previous publication,
using a combination of experimental and simulation results, we
showed that the insertion of a methyl spacer in the P3MEEMT
side chain resulted in a marked enhancement in side-chain
segmental mobility compared to P3MEET.37 We suspect that
the higher side-chain segmental mobility in P3MEEMT not
only facilitates diﬀusion of molecular dopants into the ﬁlm
during doping but also accelerates the dedoping process at
elevated temperatures.
One ﬁnal possible explanation could be the favorable
interaction between the P3MEET side chain and F4TCNQ
as suggested by MD simulations below, which will eventually
lead to the slower evaporation rate of F4TCNQ and thus
superior thermal stability of the P3MEET:F4TCNQ system.
Using the same MD simulation system demonstrated in Figure
5, we look further into the response of each polymer−dopant
to F4TCNQ loading. Shown in Figure 8 is the energy of
interaction, Eint, between the polymers and F4TCNQ,
normalized to the amount of F4TCNQ loaded into the system.
As seen in Figure 8, until a critical loading of F4TCNQ into the
system, Eint for P3MEET is found to be equal to or lower than
Eint for P3MEEMT. This indicates that P3MEET more
favorably interacts with F4TCNQ and as such should have a
lower chemical potential. We hypothesize this favorable
interaction between the dopant and the side chain in
P3MEET imparts polymer/dopant miscibility and hence
enhances the thermal stability of the P3MEET:F4TCNQ
system.
3. CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we investigated the role of polar side-chain
chemistry in molecular doping eﬃciency, conductivity, and
thermal stability through two polythiophene derivatives,
P3MEET and P3MEEMT, upon doping with the molecular
dopants F1TCNQ, F2TCNQ, and F4TCNQ. Both polymers
possessed oligoethylene glycol polar side chains with their only
diﬀerence being a methyl spacer between the oxygen and the
thiophene in P3MEEMT. The values of σ are within the same
order of magnitude for all three ﬂuorinated dopants for the
P3MEET polymer, while σ of P3MEEMT decreases
signiﬁcantly with the decreasing ﬂuorination level of dopants,
consistent with the polymer−dopant energy level mismatch as
suggested by CV measurements. Despite the similarity in their
chemical structures, P3MEET exhibited much higher elec-
tronic conductivity upon vapor doping with FnTCNQ and
superior thermal stability compared to that of P3MEEMT.
Using a combination of experimental and MD simulation
approaches, we showed that the enhanced conductivity in
P3MEET compared to P3MEEMT likely originated from
better doping eﬃciency of the dopant in P3MEET and higher
degree of conformational order of polymer chains in the
amorphous domain. Meaning, eﬃcient doping in P3MEET led
to higher carrier concentration and the further stiﬀening of
polymer chains in the amorphous domain provides for a higher
charge carrier mobility. Though the doping eﬃciency diﬀer-
ences appear clear, the reason for the variation in enhanced
thermal stability in P3MEET:FnTCNQ could originate from
several factors. First, the low IE imparted from the placement
of the oxygen atom next to the thiophene core could stabilize
the polaron formed upon doping, thus hindering the dedoping
process. Second, the low segmental mobility of the side chain
in P3MEET might result in the slow diﬀusion of F4TCNQ and
consequently slower sublimation rate. Finally, the favorable
side-chain-dopant interaction could enhance the intermixing
between P3MEET:FnTCNQ pairs and their thermal stability.
While additional work is needed to decipher the exact
mechanism of enhanced thermal stability in doped P3MEET,
our data suggested that in contrast to previous beliefs, the use
of a polar side-chain alone is not suﬃcient to achieve high
conductivity and thermal stability in molecularly doped CPs.
Future design of side chains for high performing materials
should take into consideration factors such as side-chain
segmental mobility, side-chain−dopant interaction, and the
inﬂuence of dopants on the semicrystalline structure of the
polymers.
4. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
4.1.
Materials
and
Sample
Preparation.
Poly(3-
(methoxyethoxyethoxy)thiophene) (P3MEET) and poly(3-
(methoxyethoxyethoxymethyl)thiophene) (P3MEEMT) were synthe-
sized by ﬁrst synthesizing the monomers 2,5-dibromo-3-
(methoxyethoxyethoxy)thiophene [3MEET] and 2,5-dibromo-3-
(methoxyethoxyethoxymethyl)thiophene [3MEEMT] and then poly-
merizing using Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization (KCTP).
Additional synthetic details are provided in our previous publication37
and in the Supporting Information.
All substrates used in this study were cleaned by ultrasonication in
acetone and 2-propanol for 15 min in each solvent, followed by
ozone−plasma treatment for 3 min. Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-
ray scattering (GIWAXS) and spectroscopic ellipsometry measure-
ments were performed on ﬁlms deposited on Si substrates with 1.5
nm of native SiO2. UV−vis spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR), and four-point probe conductivity measurements
Figure 8. MD simulation results of side-chain/F4TCNQ nonbond
energy Eint as a function of F4TCNQ to monomer ratio.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
749

were performed on ﬁlms deposited on quartz substrates. Electronic
conductivity measurements were also performed on ﬁlms deposited
atop custom-fabricated interdigitated gold electrodes (IDEs) on Si
substrates possessing 1000 nm of thermally grown SiO2.
Solutions of P3MEET and P3MEEMT were prepared by dissolving
the materials in anhydrous chloroform and anhydrous acetonitrile,
respectively, at a concentration of 10 mg/mL and stirring overnight
before being ﬁltered through a 0.45 μm ﬁlter. The solutions were then
spin-casted under an argon atmosphere onto the prepared substrates
at 2000 rpm for 2 min. Film thicknesses of all samples in this study
were kept at ca. 50 nm, as conﬁrmed by spectroscopic ellipsometry
measurements.
4.2. Vapor Doping Procedure for Molecular Dopants. Vapor
doping of FnTCNQ (n = 1, 2, 4) was performed using the previously
described procedure.24 In brief, polymer thin ﬁlms were vapor-doped
with FnTCNQ in an argon-ﬁlled glovebox. Approximately 5 mg of
dopant was placed in a glass cylinder (diameter, ∼5 cm; height, ∼4.5
cm), and then, the glass cylinder was inserted into a preheated
stainless steel container for at least 30 min on top of a hotplate. Due
to the diﬀerence in sublimation temperature of each dopant, the
temperature of the hotplate was set to 220, 200, and 180 °C for
F4TCNQ, F2TCNQ, and F1TCNQ, respectively. During the vapor
doping process, the thin ﬁlm sample was placed upside down above
the glass jar. The sample was kept at a constant temperature of 50 °C
during the doping process using a custom-built thermoelectric
module.
4.3. Electronic Conductivity Calculation. Electronic conduc-
tivity was measured either using the four-point probe method (for
conductivity above 10−3 S/cm) or IDEs (for conductivity below 10−3
S/cm). Four-point probe conductivity gold contacts had a channel
length of 0.2 mm and a channel width of 1 mm. Four-point probe
conductivity measurements were performed using a custom-designed
probe station in an argon glovebox. Voltage and current measure-
ments were performed using a Keithley 2400 source measure unit and
a Keithley 6221 precision current source. A constant current was
applied to the outer contacts, and the resultant steady-state voltage
response was recorded from the inside contacts. The resistance (R;
Ω) of the sample was extracted from the slope of the VI sweep using
Ohm’s law (V = IR).
IDE conductivity measurements were performed by applying the
DC measurement method to samples fabricated atop IDE devices.
The extracted resistance R was then used to calculate the sample
conductivity σ according to the following equation
R
d
l N
h
1
(
1)
σ =
−
Here, d = 8 μm is the separation distance between electrode contacts,
l = 1000 μm is the electrode length, N = 160 is the number of
electrodes, and h is the ﬁlm thickness.
4.4. Grazing-Incidence Wide-Angle X-ray Scattering (GI-
WAXS). GIWAXS measurements were performed at beamline 8-ID-E
of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory with
10.86 keV (λ = 0.11416 nm) synchrotron radiation. Samples were
enclosed and measured inside a low vacuum chamber (10−3 mbar) to
minimize concerns about radiation damage as well as to prevent
extraneous scattering from ambient air. The measurement time was
chosen to be 10 s/frame. For each sample, three data sets were taken
from three adjacent spots on the sample and then summed to enhance
the signal-to-noise ratio. In our work, the samples were tilted at an
angle of incidence of 0.14° with respect to the incoming beam. This
angle was chosen to be above the estimated critical angle of the
sample (ca. 0.13°) but below the critical angle of the Si substrates (ca.
0.17°). The scattering signal was recorded with a Pilatus 1MF pixel
array detector (pixel size = 172 μm) positioned 228 mm from the
sample. Each data set was stored as a 981 × 1043 32-bit tiﬀimage
with a 20-bit dynamic range. The Pilatus detector has rows of inactive
pixels at the border between detector modules. To ﬁll these gaps, after
each measurement, the detector was moved to a new vertical direction
and the measurement on each spot was repeated; then, the gaps were
ﬁlled by combining the data from two detector positions. The signals
were reshaped and output as intensity maps in qz vs qr
q
q
(
)
x
y
2
2
=
+
space. We also performed detector nonuniformity,
detection eﬃciency, the polarization eﬀect, and solid-angle variation
for each image. Vertical linecuts were performed as a function of
intensity along the qz direction. All of the GIWAXS data processing
and extraction were executed using the GIXSGUI package for
MATLAB.59
We calculated the side-chain distance, π-stacking distance in
P3MEET, and π-stacking in P3MEEMT by analyzing vertical linecuts
of GIWAXS patterns but calculated the side-chain distance in
P3MEEMT by analyzing horizontal linecuts of GIWAXS patterns.
This was due to the more favorable in-plane orientation of the
P3MEEMT side chain, which gave rise to a stronger side-chain
diﬀraction signal in horizontal linecuts compared to vertical linecuts.
Each linecut was subjected to an empirical baseline subtraction before
ﬁtting with a Voigt function to compute the peak position and side-
chain or π-stacking distance according to d = 2π/q.
4.5. UV−Vis−NIR Absorption Spectroscopy. The UV−vis−
NIR absorption spectroscopy measurements were performed using a
Shimadzu UV-3600 Plus UV−vis−NIR dual-beam spectrophotometer
at the Soft Matter Characterization Facility (SMCF) at the University
of Chicago.
4.6. Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectroscopy.
Continuous-wave (CW) X-band (9−10 GHz) EPR experiments were
carried out with a Bruker ELEXSYS II E500 EPR spectrometer
(Bruker Biospin, Rheinstetten, Germany), equipped with a TE102
rectangular EPR resonator (Bruker ER 4102ST). Measurements were
performed at room temperature (T = 295 K). Thin ﬁlms on the
substrate with dimensions 2 mm × 15 mm2 were placed in the EPR
quartz tubes with 4 mm i.d. For spin quantiﬁcation, a single crystal of
CuSO4·H2O with known spin concentration was used as a reference
sample. Spin quantiﬁcations were done by comparing double integrals
of the experimental and reference EPR signals. For EPR measure-
ment, we estimate a relative error of ca. 20% for each sample due to
variations from experimental conditions.
4.7. Raman Spectroscopy. Raman spectroscopy experiments
were performed under ambient conditions using a Horiba LabRAM
HR Evolution NIR confocal Raman microscope housed in Chicago
Materials Research Center. Raman spectra of neat and doped
P3MEET and P3MEEMT thin ﬁlms were collected using a 100×
objective at three diﬀerent excitation wavelengths, 633, 532, and 473
nm. The spatial resolution of each measurement is dependent on the
numerical aperture of the microscope objective, the wavelength of the
laser used, and the pinhole size of the confocal imaging mode. In our
conﬁgurations, the spatial resolution of each Raman spectrum is
calculated to be less than 1 mm. Laser power and accumulation time
were set to 1% and 20 s to minimize local heating and material
degradation.
4.8. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA). Polymer/dopant
blends for TGA analysis were prepared by mixing P3MEET and
P3MEEMT solution with F4TCNQ solution and then the mixed
solution was freeze-dried to remove the solvents. P3MEET was
dissolved in chloroform, whereas P3MEEMT and F4TCNQ were
dissolved in acetonitrile. TGA measurements were using a discovery
thermogravimetric analyzer at the Soft Mater Characterization Facility
(SMCF) at the University of Chicago. All TGA samples were
measured under a constant ﬂow of N2 gas and a heating rate of 10
°C/min.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153.
Synthesis details of P3MEET and P3MEEMT; CV data
of P3MEET, P3MEEMT, F1TCNQ, F2TCNQ, and
F4TCNQ; additional GIWAXS data, including raw
GIWAXS images of F4TCNQ-doped samples, pole
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
750

ﬁgure analysis, linecuts of GIWAXS images before and
after doping with F4TCNQ; linecuts of GIWAXS images
at diﬀerent X-ray incidence angles; raw EPR spectra;
thermal stability data in ambient air at diﬀerent
temperatures; solution/solid-state absorption spectra of
P3MEET and P3MEEMT; and MD simulation details
(PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Shrayesh N. Patel −Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United
States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-3657-827X;
Email: shrayesh@uchicago.edu
Authors
Ban Xuan Dong −Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United
States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-2873-5207
Christian Nowak −School of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14953,
United States
Jonathan W. Onorato −Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-1349-8277
Tengzhou Ma −Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United
States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-9116-5518
Jens Niklas −Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division,
Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439,
United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6462-2680
Oleg G. Poluektov −Chemical Sciences and Engineering
Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois
60439, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-3067-9272
Garrett Grocke −Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United
States;
orcid.org/0000-0001-8661-5038
Mark F. DiTusa −Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United States
Fernando A. Escobedo −School of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York 14953, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-4722-
9836
Christine K. Luscombe −Department of Materials Science
and Engineering, Department of Chemistry, and Molecular
Engineering & Sciences Institute, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195, United States;
orcid.org/
0000-0001-7456-1343
Paul F. Nealey −Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United
States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-3889-142X
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NSF DMREF Award number
1922259. This research used resources of the Advanced
Photon Source, an Oﬃce of Science User Facility operated for
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) by Argonne National
Laboratory under Contract no. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The
EPR work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE), Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical
Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, under Contract no.
DE-AC-02-06CH11357. Part of this work was carried out at
the Soft Matter Characterization Facility of the University of
Chicago. This work made use of the Pritzker Nanofabrication
Facility, which receives partial support from the SHyNE
Resource, a node of the National Science Foundation’s
National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NSF
ECCS-2025633).
■REFERENCES
(1) Borsenberger, P. M.; Weiss, D. S. Organic Photoreceptors for
Xerography; CRC Press: New York, 1998; pp 1−755.
(2) Geffroy, B.; le Roy, P.; Prat, C. Organic Light-Emitting Diode
(OLED) Technology: Materials, Devices and Display Technologies.
Polym. Int. 2006, 55, 572−582.
(3) Müllen, K.; Scherf, U. Organic Light Emitting Devices: Synthesis,
Properties and Applications; Wiley: New York, 2006; pp 1−410.
(4) Sirringhaus, H. 25th Anniversary Article: Organic Field-Effect
Transistors: The Path Beyond Amorphous Silicon. Adv. Mater. 2014,
26, 1319−1335.
(5) Günes, S.; Neugebauer, H.; Sariciftci, N. S. Conjugated Polymer-
Based Organic Solar Cells. Chem. Rev. 2007, 107, 1324−1338.
(6) Kroon, R.; Lenes, M.; Hummelen, J. C.; Blom, P. W. M.; de
Boer, B. Small Bandgap Polymers for Organic Solar Cells (Polymer
Material Development in the Last 5 Years). Polym. Rev. 2008, 48,
531−582.
(7) Loiudice, A.; Rizzo, A.; Biasiucci, M.; Gigli, G. Bulk
Heterojunction versus Diffused Bilayer: The Role of Device
Geometry in Solution p-Doped Polymer-Based Solar Cells. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2012, 3, 1908−1915.
(8) Zhang, Y.; Zhou, H.; Seifter, J.; Ying, L.; Mikhailovsky, A.;
Heeger, A. J.; Bazan, G. C.; Nguyen, T.-Q. Molecular Doping
Enhances Photoconductivity in Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar
Cells. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 7038−7044.
(9) Yan, H.; Manion, J. G.; Yuan, M.; García de Arquer, F. P.;
McKeown, G. R.; Beaupré, S.; Leclerc, M.; Sargent, E. H.; Seferos, D.
S. Increasing Polymer Solar Cell Fill Factor by Trap-Filling with F4-
TCNQ at Parts Per Thousand Concentration. Adv. Mater. 2016,
6491−6496.
(10) Lu, G.; Blakesley, J.; Himmelberger, S.; Pingel, P.; Frisch, J.;
Lieberwirth, I.; Salzmann, I.; Oehzelt, M.; Di Pietro, R.; Salleo, A.;
et al. Moderate Doping Leads to High Performance of Semi-
conductor/Insulator Polymer Blend Transistors. Nat. Commun. 2013,
4, No. 1588.
(11) Lüssem, B.; Keum, C. M.; Kasemann, D.; Naab, B.; Bao, Z.;
Leo, K. Doped Organic Transistors. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 13714−
13751.
(12) Bubnova, O.; Crispin, X. Towards Polymer-Based Organic
Thermoelectric Generators. Energy Environ. Sci. 2012, 5, 9345−9362.
(13) Russ, B.; Glaudell, A.; Urban, J. J.; Chabinyc, M. L.; Segalman,
R. A. Organic Thermoelectric Materials for Energy Harvesting and
Temperature Control. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, No. 16050.
(14) Patel, S. N.; Chabinyc, M. L. Anisotropies and the
Thermoelectric Properties of Semiconducting Polymers. J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 2017, 134, No. 44403.
(15) Kang, K.; Watanabe, S.; Broch, K.; Sepe, A.; Brown, A.;
Nasrallah, I.; Nikolka, M.; Fei, Z.; Heeney, M.; Matsumoto, D.; et al.
2D Coherent Charge Transport in Highly Ordered Conducting
Polymers Doped by Solid State Diffusion. Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 896−
902.
(16) Jacobs, I. E.; Aasen, E. W.; Oliveira, J. L.; Fonseca, T. N.; et al.
Comparison of Solution-Mixed and Sequentially Doping-Induced
Aggregation on Film Morphology. J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4, 3454−
3466.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
751

(17) Scholes, D. T.; Hawks, S. A.; Yee, P. Y.; Wu, H.; Lindemuth, J.
R.; Tolbert, S. H.; Schwartz, B. J. Overcoming Film Quality Issues for
Conjugated Polymers Doped with F4TCNQ by Solution Sequential
Processing: Hall Effect, Structural, and Optical Measurements. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 4786−4793.
(18) Patel, S. N.; Javier, A. E.; Beers, K. M.; Pople, J. A.; Ho, V.;
Segalman, R. A.; Balsara, N. P. Morphology and Thermodynamic
Properties of a Copolymer with an Electronically Conducting Block:
Poly(3-Ethylhexylthiophene)-Block-Poly(Ethylene Oxide). Nano Lett.
2012, 12, 4901−4906.
(19) Lim, E.; Peterson, K. A.; Su, G. M.; Chabinyc, M. L.
Thermoelectric Properties of Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) (P3HT)
Doped with 2,3,5,6-Tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-Tetracyanoquinodimethane
(F4TCNQ) by Vapor-Phase Infiltration. Chem. Mater. 2018, 30,
998−1010.
(20) Hynynen, J.; Kiefer, D.; Yu, L.; Kroon, R.; Munir, R.; Amassian,
A.; Kemerink, M.; Müller, C. Enhanced Electrical Conductivity of
Molecularly P-Doped Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) through Understand-
ing the Correlation with Solid-State Order. Macromolecules 2017, 50,
8140−8148.
(21) Dong, B. X.; Liu, Z.; Misra, M.; Strzalka, J.; Niklas, J.;
Poluektov, O.; Escobedo, F. A.; Ober, C. K.; Nealey, P. F.; Patel, S. N.
Structure Control of a π-Conjugated Oligothiophene-Based Liquid
Crystal for Enhanced Mixed Ion/Electron Transport Characteristics.
ACS Nano 2019, 13, 7665−7675.
(22) Gao, J.; Stein, B. W.; Thomas, A. K.; Garcia, J. A.; Yang, J.; Kirk,
M. L.; Grey, J. K. Enhanced Charge Transfer Doping Efficiency in J-
Aggregate Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) Nanofibers. J. Phys. Chem. C
2015, 119, 16396−16402.
(23) Salzmann, I.; Heimel, G.; Oehzelt, M.; Winkler, S.; Koch, N.
Molecular Electrical Doping of Organic Semiconductors: Fundamen-
tal Mechanisms and Emerging Dopant Design Rules. Acc. Chem. Res.
2016, 49, 370−378.
(24) Patel, S. N.; Glaudell, A. M.; Peterson, K. A.; Thomas, E. M.;
O’Hara, K. A.; Lim, E.; Chabinyc, M. L. Morphology Controls the
Thermoelectric Power Factor of a Doped Semiconducting Polymer.
Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, No. e1700434.
(25) Ma, T.; Dong, B. X.; Grocke, G. L.; Strzalka, J.; Patel, S. N.
Leveraging Sequential Doping of Semiconducting Polymers to Enable
Functionally Graded Materials for Organic Thermoelectrics. Macro-
molecules 2020, 53, 2882−2892.
(26) Scholes, D. T.; Yee, P. Y.; Lindemuth, J. R.; Kang, H.; Onorato,
J.; Ghosh, R.; Luscombe, C. K.; Spano, F. C.; Tolbert, S. H.; Schwartz,
B. J. The Effects of Crystallinity on Charge Transport and the
Structure of Sequentially Processed F4TCNQ-Doped Conjugated
Polymer Films. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, No. 1702654.
(27) Hamidi-Sakr, A.; Biniek, L.; Bantignies, J. L.; Maurin, D.;
Herrmann, L.; Leclerc, N.; Lévêque, P.; Vijayakumar, V.;
Zimmermann, N.; Brinkmann, M. A Versatile Method to Fabricate
Highly In-Plane Aligned Conducting Polymer Films with Anisotropic
Charge Transport and Thermoelectric Properties: The Key Role of
Alkyl Side Chain Layers on the Doping Mechanism. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2017, 27, No. 1700173.
(28) Glaudell, A. M.; Cochran, J. E.; Patel, S. N.; Chabinyc, M. L.
Impact of the Doping Method on Conductivity and Thermopower in
Semiconducting Polythiophenes. Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5,
No. 1401072.
(29) Schlitz, R. A.; Brunetti, F. G.; Glaudell, A. M.; Miller, P. L.;
Brady, M. A.; Takacs, C. J.; Hawker, C. J.; Chabinyc, M. L. Solubility-
Limited Extrinsic n-Type Doping of a High Electron Mobility
Polymer for Thermoelectric Applications. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26,
2825−2830.
(30) Vijayakumar, V.; Zhong, Y.; Untilova, V.; Bahri, M.; Herrmann,
L.; Biniek, L.; Leclerc, N.; Brinkmann, M. Bringing Conducting
Polymers to High Order: Toward Conductivities beyond 10 5 S Cm
−1 and Thermoelectric Power Factors of 2 MW m −1 K −2. Adv.
Energy Mater. 2019, No. 1900266.
(31) Li, J.; Rochester, C. W.; Jacobs, I. E.; Aasen, E. W.; Friedrich,
S.; Stroeve, P.; Moulé, A. J. The Effect of Thermal Annealing on
Dopant Site Choice in Conjugated Polymers. Org. Electron. 2016, 33,
23−31.
(32) Li, J.; Rochester, C. W.; Jacobs, I. E.; Friedrich, S.; Stroeve, P.;
Riede, M.; Moulé, A. J. Measurement of Small Molecular Dopant
F4TCNQ and C60F36 Diffusion in Organic Bilayer Architectures.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 28420−28428.
(33) Li, J.; Koshnick, C.; Diallo, S. O.; Ackling, S.; Huang, D. M.;
Jacobs, I. E.; Harrelson, T. F.; Hong, K.; Zhang, G.; Beckett, J.; et al.
Quantitative Measurements of the Temperature-Dependent Micro-
scopic and Macroscopic Dynamics of a Molecular Dopant in a
Conjugated Polymer. Macromolecules 2017, 50, 5476−5489.
(34) Yamashita, Y.; Tsurumi, J.; Ohno, M.; Fujimoto, R.; Kumagai,
S.; Kurosawa, T.; Okamoto, T.; Takeya, J.; Watanabe, S. Efficient
Molecular Doping of Polymeric Semiconductors Driven by Anion
Exchange. Nature 2019, 572, 634−638.
(35) Kroon, R.; Kiefer, D.; Stegerer, D.; Yu, L.; Sommer, M.; Müller,
C. Polar Side Chains Enhance Processability, Electrical Conductivity,
and Thermal Stability of a Molecularly p-Doped Polythiophene. Adv.
Mater. 2017, 29, No. 1700930.
(36) Kiefer, D.; Kroon, R.; Hofmann, A. I.; Sun, H.; Liu, X.;
Giovannitti, A.; Stegerer, D.; Cano, A.; Hynynen, J.; Yu, L.; et al.
Double Doping of Conjugated Polymers with Monomer Molecular
Dopants. Nat. Mater. 2019, 18, 149−155.
(37) Dong, B. X.; Nowak, C.; Onorato, J. W.; Strzalka, J.; Escobedo,
F. A.; Luscombe, C. K.; Nealey, P. F.; Patel, S. N. Influence of Side-
Chain Chemistry on Structure and Ionic Conduction Characteristics
of Polythiophene Derivatives: A Computational and Experimental
Study. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429.
(38) Nielsen, C. B.; Giovannitti, A.; Sbircea, D. T.; Bandiello, E.;
Niazi, M. R.; Hanifi, D. A.; Sessolo, M.; Amassian, A.; Malliaras, G.
G.; Rivnay, J.; et al. Molecular Design of Semiconducting Polymers
for High-Performance Organic Electrochemical Transistors. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 10252−10259.
(39) Hu, P.; Du, K.; Wei, F.; Jiang, H.; Kloc, C. Crystal Growth,
HOMO-LUMO Engineering, and Charge Transfer Degree in
Perylene-FxTCNQ (x = 1, 2, 4) Organic Charge Transfer Binary
Compounds. Cryst. Growth Des. 2016, 16, 3019−3027.
(40) Li, J.; Duchemin, I.; Roscioni, O. M.; Friederich, P.; Anderson,
M.; Da Como, E.; Kociok-Köhn, G.; Wenzel, W.; Zannoni, C.;
Beljonne, D.; et al. Host Dependence of the Electron Affinity of
Molecular Dopants. Mater. Horiz. 2019, 6, 107−114.
(41) Méndez, H.; Heimel, G.; Winkler, S.; Frisch, J.; Opitz, A.;
Sauer, K.; Wegner, B.; Oehzelt, M.; Röthel, C.; Duhm, S.; et al.
Charge-Transfer Crystallites as Molecular Electrical Dopants. Nat.
Commun. 2015, 6, No. 8560.
(42) Wang, C.; Duong, D. T.; Vandewal, K.; Rivnay, J.; Salleo, A.
Optical Measurement of Doping Efficiency in Poly(3-Hexylthio-
phene) Solutions and Thin Films. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 2015, 91, No. 085205.
(43) Jacobs, I. E.; Aasen, E. W.; Oliveira, J. L.; Fonseca, T. N.;
Roehling, J. D.; Li, J.; Zhang, G.; Augustine, M. P.; Mascal, M.;
Moulé, A. J. Comparison of Solution-Mixed and Sequentially
Processed P3HT:F4TCNQ FFlms: Effect of Doping-Induced
Aggregation on Film Morphology. J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4,
3454−3466.
(44) Coehoorn, R.; Pasveer, W.; Bobbert, P.; Michels, M. Charge-
Carrier Concentration Dependence of the Hopping Mobility in
Organic Materials with Gaussian Disorder. Phys. Rev. B 2005, 72,
No. 155206.
(45) Li, A.; Dong, B. X.; Green, P. Influence of Morphological
Disorder on In- and Out-of-Plane Charge Transport in Conjugated
Polymer Films. MRS Commun. 2015, 5, 593−598.
(46) Dong, B. X.; Li, A.; Strzalka, J.; Stein, G. E.; Green, P. F.
Molecular Organization in MAPLE-Deposited Conjugated Polymer
Thin Films and the Implications for Carrier Transport Characteristics.
J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 2017, 55, 39−48.
(47) Hammond, M. R.; Kline, R. J.; Herzing, A. A.; Richter, L. J.;
Germack, D. S.; Ro, H.-W.; Soles, C. L.; Fischer, D. A.; Xu, T.; Yu, L.;
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
752

et al. Molecular Order in High-Efficiency Polymer/Fullerene Bulk
Heterojunction Solar Cells. ACS Nano 2011, 5, 8248−8257.
(48) Thomas, E. M.; Brady, M. A.; Nakayama, H.; Popere, B. C.;
Segalman, R. A.; Chabinyc, M. L. X-Ray Scattering Reveals Ion-
Induced Microstructural Changes During Electrochemical Gating of
Poly(3-Hexylthiophene). Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, No. 1803687.
(49) Thelen, J. L.; Wu, S. L.; Javier, A. E.; Srinivasan, V.; Balsara, N.
P.; Patel, S. N. Relationship between Mobility and Lattice Strain in
Electrochemically Doped Poly(3-Hexylthiophene). ACS Macro Lett.
2015, 4, 1386−1391.
(50) Guardado, J. O.; Salleo, A. Structural Effects of Gating Poly(3-
Hexylthiophene) through an Ionic Liquid. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017,
27, No. 1701791.
(51) Jacobs, I. E.; Cendra, C.; Harrelson, T. F.; Bedolla Valdez, Z. I.;
Faller, R.; Salleo, A.; Moulé, A. J. Polymorphism Controls the Degree
of Charge Transfer in a Molecularly Doped Semiconducting Polymer.
Mater. Horiz. 2018, 5, 655−660.
(52) Müller, L.; Nanova, D.; Glaser, T.; Beck, S.; Pucci, A.; Kast, A.
K.; Schröder, R. R.; Mankel, E.; Pingel, P.; Neher, D.; et al. Charge-
Transfer-Solvent Interaction Predefines Doping Efficiency in p-Doped
P3HT Films. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 4432−4439.
(53) Liu, W.; Müller, L.; Ma, S.; Barlow, S.; Marder, S. R.; Kowalsky,
W.; Köhn, A.; Lovrincic, R. The Origin of the π-π Spacing Change
upon Doping of Semiconducting Polymers. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018,
27983.
(54) Schmode, P.; Savva, A.; Kahl, R.; Ohayon, D.; Meichsner, F.;
Dolynchuk, O.; Thurn-Albrecht, T.; Inal, S.; Thelakkat, M. The Key
Role of Side Chain Linkage in Structure Formation and Mixed
Conduction of Ethylene Glycol Substituted Polythiophenes. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039.
(55) Chew, A. R.; Ghosh, R.; Shang, Z.; Spano, F. C.; Salleo, A.
Sequential Doping Reveals the Importance of Amorphous Chain
Rigidity in Charge Transport of Semi-Crystalline Polymers. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2017, 8, 4974−4980.
(56) Tsoi, W. C.; James, D. T.; Kim, J. S.; Nicholson, P. G.; Murphy,
C. E.; Bradley, D. D. C.; Nelson, J.; Kim, J. S. The Nature of In-Plane
Skeleton Raman Modes of P3HT and Their Correlation to the
Degree of Molecular Order in P3HT:PCBM Blend Thin Films. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 9834−9843.
(57) Lim, E.; Glaudell, A. M.; Miller, R.; Chabinyc, M. L. The Role
of Ordering on the Thermoelectric Properties of Blends of
Regioregular and Regiorandom Poly(3-Hexylthiophene). Adv. Elec-
tron. Mater. 2019, No. 1800915.
(58) Finn, P.; Jacobs, I. E.; Armitage, J.; Wu, R.; Paulsen, B.; Freeley,
M.; Palma, M.; Rivnay, J.; Sirringhaus, H.; Nielsen, C. Effect of Polar
Side Chains on Neutral and P-Doped Polythiophene. J. Mater. Chem.
C 2020, 16216.
(59) Jiang, Z. GIXSGUI: A MATLAB Toolbox for Grazing-
Incidence X-Ray Scattering Data Visualization and Reduction, and
Indexing of Buried Three-Dimensional Periodic Nanostructured
Films. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2015, 48, 917−926.
Chemistry of Materials
pubs.acs.org/cm
Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04153
Chem. Mater. 2021, 33, 741−753
753

