
REVIEW
www.afm-journal.de
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1807033  (1 of 15)
Materials in Organic Electrochemical Transistors  
for Bioelectronic Applications: Past, Present, and Future
Maximilian Moser,* James F. Ponder Jr., Andrew Wadsworth, Alexander Giovannitti, 
and Iain McCulloch
Organic electrochemical transistors are bioelectronic devices that 
exploit the coupled nature of ionic and electronic fluxes to achieve 
superior transducing abilities compared to conventional organic field 
effect transistors. In particular, the operation of organic electrochemical 
transistors relies on a channel material capable of conducting both ionic 
and electronic charge carriers to ensure bulk electrochemical doping. 
This review explores the various types of organic semiconductors that 
are employed as channel materials, with a particular focus on the past 
5 years, during which the transducing abilities of organic electrochemical 
transistors have witnessed an almost tenfold increase. Specifically, the 
structure–property relationships of the various channel materials employed 
are investigated, highlighting how device performance can be related 
to functionality at the molecular level. Finally, an outlook on the field is 
provided, in particular toward the design guidelines of future materials 
and the challenges ahead in the field.
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.201807033
applications and include neural inter-
facing 
electrodes, 
cochlear 
implants, 
glucose sensors for diabetics, and many 
more.[4–9]
Over the last two decades the field has 
experienced rapid growth, as shown in 
Figure 1, which collates the total number 
of citations of publications which include 
the term “bioelectronics” between 1999 
and 2017. A large contribution to this 
rise stems from the increased research 
activity in the broader context of organic 
electronics. There, significant advances in 
the mechanistic understanding and mate-
rials design for organic field effect transis-
tors (OFETs),[10–14] organic light emitting 
diodes (OLEDs),[15–17] electrochromic dis-
plays (ECDs),[18] charge storage devices,[19] 
and organic photovoltaics (OPVs)[20–23] 
have spurred further development. A 
common feature of the materials used 
for these various applications lies in the delocalized nature of 
conjugated, π-electrons, giving rise to semiconducting band-
gaps, and facilitating charge carrier mobility along and between 
chains. While the electrical properties of the materials used 
can be easily tailored by chemical design, another approach is 
chemical doping. Here, the addition of a dopant either removes 
electrons (p-type doping) from the highest occupied molecular 
orbital (HOMO) or donates electrons (n-type doping) to the 
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) to afford conduc-
tive polaron or bipolaron states. This oxidation or reduction 
process can also be achieved electrochemically, when applica-
tion of a potential between electrodes inject or extract charges 
from the semiconductor and the electrolyte.
The predominant use of organic semiconductors, rather 
than their inorganic counterparts, as translators between the 
electronic and biological domains arises from a unique set of 
features possessed by these materials, the most crucial of which 
being the weak van der Waals’ intermolecular forces confer-
ring organic materials a “soft” character.[2] This softness can 
be further enhanced through the choice of the polymer’s side 
groups, which can further facilitate the swelling of the material 
allowing for the uptake of both ions and solvent throughout the 
bulk during the electrochemical doping and dedoping process. 
This results in an efficient ion-to-electron signal conversion. A 
simple and elegant demonstration of this phenomenon is the 
“moving front” experiment, which also found ionic mobility in 
conductive polymers to be of a similar magnitude as those in 
Organic Electrochemical Transistors
M. Moser, Dr. J. F. Ponder Jr., Dr. A. Wadsworth, Dr. A. Giovannitti
Department of Chemistry and Centre for Plastic Electronics
Imperial College London
London SW7 2AZ, UK
E-mail: maximilian.moser13@imperial.ac.uk
Prof. I. McCulloch
Department of Chemistry and Centre for Plastic Electronic s
Imperial College London
London SW7 2AZ, UK
Prof. I. McCulloch
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Physical Sciences and Engineering Division
KAUST Solar Center (KSC)
Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201807033.
1. Introduction
Bioelectronics is enabled by the transduction of electronic sig-
nals into biological ones and vice versa.[1] Although the vast 
majority of articles in the literature have credited Luigi Galvani, 
with the twitching frog experiment, as the father of bioelec-
tronics, Plato’s Meno suggests that the electrogenic properties 
of electric rays have been known and used for the wellbeing 
of the Greek population for over 2000 years.[2,3] Currently, 
bioelectronic devices are predominantly found in healthcare 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (2 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
water.[24] Additional benefits of organic semiconductors over 
their inorganic counterparts include their: i) facile chemical 
modification, allowing functionality to be defined at the molec-
ular level; ii) solution processability, enabling low temperature 
and low-cost processing; iii) compatibility with conventional 
printing and roll-to-roll techniques, facilitating their industrial 
scale up and application; iv) low operating voltages, allowing 
for operation in aqueous solvents and reducing the likelihood 
for potential side reactions; and v) high potential for biocom-
patibility, which can be further increased by tuning the self-
assembling properties of the material or by incorporation of 
biomolecular side groups.[25–28]
Since the inception of modern bioelectronics, numerous 
device types, and architectures have been developed and 
employed for various applications. Amongst these are: elec-
trodes for cell culture and neural recording, OFETs targeted 
for gas sensing, organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) 
for signal amplification and analyte sensing as well as many 
others.[29–33] In this review, we report the significant progress 
made in OECT technology over the last few years, with a par-
ticular focus on the channel materials employed. More detailed 
accounts of alternative devices in bioelectronics; OFETs as 
sensing elements in bioelectronics, and the various biological 
applications of OECTs can be found elsewhere in the litera-
ture.[25,34,35] Additionally, as OECTs are primarily of interest in 
regards to biological systems, this review focuses on OECTs 
using aqueous electrolytes, although, OECTs using organic 
electrolytes or mixed organic/aqueous electrolytes are also 
being investigated.[36–38]
2. OECT Operating Principles and Performance
Similar to electrolyte gated-OFETs (EG-OFETs), OECTs feature 
a three-terminal architecture comprising a source, drain, and 
gate electrode. The gate electrode is placed into contact with 
the channel material via an electrolyte, illustrated in Figure 2. 
As in EG-OFETs, changes in the source–drain current (ISD) can 
be modulated by changes in the gate voltage (VG) as this varies 
James Ponder received 
his B.Sc. degree from the 
University of North Florida 
in 2011. He then joined the 
research group of Prof. John 
R. Reynolds at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology 
(GaTech). During his 
time there, James studied 
redox active polymers for 
electrochromic and charge 
storage applications as 
well as polymer thermoelectrics. In 2017, James received 
his Ph.D. from GaTech and joined the research group 
of Prof. Iain McCulloch as a postdoctoral researcher. 
He is currently designing materials for spintronics and 
bioelectronics in addition to nonfullerene acceptors for 
organic photovoltaics.
Iain McCulloch holds 
positions as Professor of 
Chemical Science within 
the Division of Physical 
Sciences and Engineering 
of KAUST, and a Chair in 
Polymer Materials within the 
Chemistry Department at 
Imperial College London. He 
is also the Director of KAUST 
Solar Center and a cofounder 
and director of Flexink 
Limited. Previously, he spent 18 years managing industrial 
research groups at Hoechst Corporation in the US and 
Merck in the UK, focused on understanding the control of 
microstructure and energy levels in conjugated aromatic 
semiconducting molecules.
Maximilian Moser received 
his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry 
from Imperial College 
London in 2017, during 
which he focused on the 
design of small molecule 
nonfullerene acceptors for 
organic photovoltaics. Since 
then, he has embarked on 
his Ph.D. at the Centre for 
Plastic Electronics at Imperial 
College London under the 
supervision of Prof. Iain McCulloch. His current research 
interests are focused on the development of novel 
materials for bioelectronic applications including organic 
electrochemical transistors and ion sensors.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 1.  Total number of citations of publications including the term 
“bioelectronics” from 1999 to 2017. Data obtained from Web of Science.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (3 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
the doping level of the channel material. The key difference 
between EG-OFETs and OECTs results from the changes in the 
doping level being restricted to the channel–electrolyte inter-
face for EG-OFETs, while in OECTs the variation in the doping 
level is observed throughout the bulk of the channel. Conse-
quently, judicious material selection and device configuration 
in OECTs can lead to superior signal amplification properties 
in OECTs.[39]
OECTs can be subdivided into four categories, depending 
on their p or n-type charge transporting properties and on 
their accumulation or depletion mode of operation. In accu-
mulation mode devices, the organic semiconductor is poorly 
conductive in its unbiased state and requires application of a 
gate potential to be doped, resulting in increased conductivity 
through the channel material, see Figure  2. Conversely, for 
depletion mode OECTs the organic semiconductor is conduc-
tive, and often self-doped, in its unbiased form and application 
of a gate potential leads to electrochemical dedoping, leading to 
a reduction of conductivity through the channel material. The 
operating principle of a depletion mode OECT using poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) 
(PEDOT:PSS) 
as a model channel material is illustrated in Figure  2. The 
electron-donating nature of the 3,4-dioxyalkyl bridge on the 
thiophene moieties yields a highly electron-rich PEDOT back-
bone, thus giving rise to the p-type character of PEDOT:PSS. 
As the PEDOT backbone is partially oxidized, with sulfonate 
groups in PSS providing charge balance, it operates in deple-
tion mode. By applying a negative potential at the drain elec-
trode (VD) while maintaining zero potential at the source (VS) 
and gate electrodes, the holes located along the PEDOT back-
bone are swept across the channel. Increasing the VG causes 
anions in the electrolyte to migrate toward the gate electrode, 
forming an electrical double layer. Concomitantly, cations are 
injected from the electrolyte into the channel material thereby 
progressively charge balancing the PSS anions and dedoping 
the PEDOT backbone, thereby depressing the source–drain 
current and eventually turning the device “off.” As a result 
of the bulk electrochemical doping/dedoping process, which 
according to the Bernards model is ascribed to an ionic and 
electronic component, mobility measurements in OECTs are 
not straightforward.[40] OECT performance is thus typically 
ascribed by another metric, the transconductance (gm), defined 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 2.  Device architecture and operating principle for a) a depletion mode OECT based on PEDOT:PSS i) in its unbiased state, ii) with hole flow 
toward the drain electrode, and iii) reduced hole flow toward the drain electrode upon application of a positive gate voltage; b) an accumulation mode 
OECT using a p-type channel material i) in its unbiased state, ii) after electrochemically doping the channel by the application of a negative gate voltage, 
and iii) with hole flow toward the drain electrode upon application of a negative potential at both the drain and gate electrode.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (4 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
mathematically in Equation (1). To link gm to material relevant 
parameters from experimental data, gm can also be expressed 
as Equation (2). From this equation it follows that the gm of an 
OECT can be modulated by adjusting either the channel dimen-
sions (w, d and l) or the channel material employed (μ and C*). 
Additionally, the gm of OECTs has also been shown to be 
strongly dependent on the nature of the gating electrode.[41–44]
g
I
V
= ∂
∂
m
SD
G

(1)
g
wd
l
C
V
V
µ
(
)
=
−
m
*
Th
G 
(2)
where ∂ISD = change in current between the source and drain 
electrodes, ∂VG  =  change in voltage between the gate and 
source electrodes, w  =  channel width, d  =  channel thickness, 
l = channel length, μ = charge carrier mobility, C* = volumetric 
capacitance, VTh = threshold voltage, and VG = gate voltage.
In addition to the gm of OECTs, variables such as OECT 
switching times, on–off ratios, and stability must also be 
taken into consideration for a more comprehensive picture of 
OECT performance. Switching times are commonly employed 
to measure the transient response of devices and are usually 
obtained by measuring the ISD as a function of time upon the 
application of square-wave gate voltages. On (τON) and off (τOFF) 
times are then defined as the time required to reach 90% and 
10% of the ISD for fully switched on and off devices, respec-
tively.[45] A limitation of reporting τON and τOFF values is that 
both are directly proportional to the channel dimensions, in 
particular channel thickness. Care must therefore be taken 
when comparing τON and τOFF values between various devices 
and ideally should always be performed for equally sized chan-
nels. High on–off ratios are preferred as this allows for higher 
sensitivity. Lastly, device stability is also of utmost importance, 
especially in the context of in vivo applications of OECTs. A 
common procedure for OECT stability evaluation involves 
measuring the ISD of devices over several hours by application 
of either a constant or more commonly a pulsed applied voltage 
load.[25] The figure of merit here is the percentage of the initial 
ISD retained after extended voltage cycling.
Although the performance of the various channel materials is 
determined entirely from the previously mentioned parameters, 
additional insights into the properties of a channel material can 
be gained through a range of alternative analytical techniques, 
including those commonly encountered in the fields of OFETs, 
OPVs and electrochromics, such as: i) cyclic voltammetry (CV), 
ii) grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering, iii) transistor 
mobility, iv) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and v) 
spectroelectrochemistry. In the context of OECTs, spectro-
electrochemical measurements are particularly useful, as they 
enable simultaneous acquisition of spectroscopic and electro-
chemical information, and provide an indication of how effec-
tively a polymer film is doping via uptake of solvated ions. 
Although there is no standard setup in spectroelectrochemistry, 
a typical measurement configuration consists of a transparent 
conductive electrode, usually indium-tin oxide (ITO), coated 
with the material of interest.[46] This electrode is then placed 
in an electrolyte solution and coupled to counter and reference 
electrodes within the sample holder of a spectrophotometer. 
During spectroelectrochemical cycling, the electrochromic 
properties of the material are evaluated by probing its absorp-
tion as a function of applied potential. In the case of PEDOT as 
a model system, application of increasingly positive potentials 
leads to progressive doping of the PEDOT film, resulting in the 
appearance of a polaronic absorption band around 900 nm and 
concomitant extinction of the shorter wavelength π–π* absorp-
tion band followed by bleaching of the polaronic absorption and 
appearance of a bipolaron band, as shown in Figure 3.
3. p-Type OECT Channel Materials
Typically, the channel in OECTs consists of a semiconducting 
or conducting organic polymer. These can be synthesized 
either electrochemically or chemically. In the electrochemical 
approach the monomer, dopant and electrolyte are dissolved in 
a common solvent and placed in a conventional three-electrode 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 3.  a) Spectroelectrochemistry of electropolymerized PEDOT on ITO glass in an organic electrolyte upon the application of a voltage from −1.0 V 
to +1.0 V in 0.1 V increments and b) mechanistic explanation of the electrochemical doping/dedoping process.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (5 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
cell. Upon application of an electrochemical potential to the 
working electrode, monomers in solution at the working elec-
trode are oxidized, affording a positively charged radical, which 
can further react with another monomer ultimately leading to 
the deposition of a polymer film that is tightly adhered to the 
electrode.[47,48] Examples of reductive electropolymerization, 
in which reduction of the monomer at the working electrode 
occurs prior to reaction with another monomer, have also been 
reported in the literature, however much less frequently.[49–51] 
By tuning various parameters, including the deposition method 
(e.g., CV or potentiostatic/galvanostatic methods), the nature 
of the working electrode, monomer concentration, electro-
lyte, and solvent, suitable polymer films can be obtained.[52] 
An advantage of this technique is the close control over the 
channel thickness that can be obtained by altering details of the 
deposition.[53] The most limiting aspects of the electrochemical 
deposition method are: i) its limited scope for monomer choice, 
allowing for the polymerization of only a handful of substrates, 
ii) its lack of control over copolymer sequencing, and iii) the 
prerequisite of a conductive surface on which to grow the 
polymer film, a difficult feature to implement in OECTs.[54,55]
The solution-phase chemical approach typically involves the 
synthesis of the relevant monomers, followed by a polymeriza-
tion step utilizing either oxidative or transition metal catalyzed 
crosscoupling polymerization conditions.[32,56] A key advan-
tage of these chemical approaches are the numerous routes 
and monomer choices that are available to synthetic chemists 
to afford the desired polymer. Nonetheless, care must be taken 
when selecting the reaction conditions, especially if the resulting 
channel material is to be used in contact with biological sys-
tems, as polymers may contain residual monomers, solvents, 
metals,[57] etc., which can be highly toxic for living systems.
3.1. Early Channel Materials
Amongst the first materials employed as the channel were 
polypyrrole (PPy) and polyaniline (PANI), structurally shown 
in Figure 4. Anodically electropolymerized PPy onto gold elec-
trodes was the first channel material to be implemented in an 
OECT.[47] In this device, a VG of −0.2 V had to be applied relative 
to a standard calomel electrode to switch off the device, as this 
coincided with the oxidation potential of PPy. At more positive 
values of VG, the device turned on and reached a maximum gm of 
≈0.1 mS at a VG of +0.1 V, while τON was ≈10 s (for a channel w 
and l of 1.4 µm) and the on–off ratio was 3000. The deployment 
of PPy in OECTs has since been scarce, predominantly due to 
its oxidative instability, as the doped polymer has a propensity to 
crosslink, thus rendering devices inoperable.[47] One of the few 
examples in literature employing PPy as the active layer material 
was in an OECT-based penicillin sensor, in which penicillinase 
was immobilized onto PPy.[58] Here, as a result of the enzymatic 
action of penicillinase, penicillin was converted into penicilloic 
acid resulting in a change in the local pH, thus increasing PPy’s 
conductivity and correspondingly the ISD.
To overcome the limitations posed by PPy, alternative semi-
conducting polymers have been investigated as channel mate-
rials, leading to PANI-based OECTs. PANI was originally 
chosen as a suitable material for OECTs due to its similar 
conductivity to PPy (up to ≈102 S cm−1), superior stability in 
electrolytes, ease of synthesis and lower-cost starting mate-
rials.[59–61] Early work on PANI-based OECTs revealed signifi-
cantly improved stability with devices retaining up to 80% of 
their initial ISD while cycling devices over 10 h.[48] In combina-
tion with higher transconductances of 0.4 mS at +0.15 V and 
faster switching times approaching ≈50 ms and <50 ms for τON 
and τOFF, respectively (for a channel w and l of 1.7 µm and d 
of 5 µm), PANI devices represented a significant improvement 
compared to the previously developed PPy ones. In the same 
set of studies, qualitative chemical sensing experiments were 
also performed by evaluating the responsive behavior of the ISD 
upon pH increments. Here, increases in the pH from 1 to 6 
resulted in a markedly lower ISD, which was due to the chem-
ical dedoping of PANI’s highly conductive emeraldine salt form 
to the poorly conducting emeraldine base form, which has been 
reported to occur at a pH of 5.5.[62] While this feature suggested 
the potential applicability of PANI-based OECTs as pH sensors, 
the original ISD values could not be restored when returning 
to pH 1, thus highlighting the irreversibility of the system. 
Consequently, a drawback of PANI as channel material is its 
requirement of a low operating pH, hence limiting its appli-
cability for biologically relevant sensing, which often occurs at 
physiological pH. Nonetheless, PANI-based OECTs have still 
been successful as chemical sensors, in particular with outer-
sphere redox reagents, whereby addition of either an oxidant, 
Fe(CN)63+, or reductant, Ru(NH3)62+, was shown to turn 
devices on and off, respectively. In another report PANI-based 
OECTs have also been used as biosensors.[63] Here glucose 
oxidase, which is stable down to a pH of 5, was immobilized 
in a poly(1,2-diaminobenzene) film and deposited onto a PANI 
channel. To link the enzymatic action to the semiconducting 
polymer a tetrathiafulvalene redox shuttle was employed. Con-
sequently, this device setup enabled glucose sensing down to 
4  × 10−6 m. Further optimization in the device setup, in par-
ticular tuning of the channel dimensions, resulted in a signifi-
cantly improved sensitivity down to 2 × 10−6 m.[64]
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 4.  Chemical structures of the various early OECT channel materials.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (6 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
3.2. PEDOT Derivatives and Conjugated Polyelectrolytes
Since its first use in OECTs, PEDOT:PSS, has emerged as the 
most successful material for OECT applications and is still widely 
considered as the golden standard. Although originally intended 
as an antistatic agent, it has also been employed in a wide range 
of fields including electrochromics displays, organic thermo-
electrics, and organic photovoltaics as a buffer layer or trans-
parent conductive electrode.[65–72] While the precise structure  
of PEDOT:PSS is dependent on the PEDOT doping level, which 
is controlled by use of additive and post film casting treat-
ments, Figure 5 serves as a representative structure of highly 
p-doped PEDOT:PSS. PEDOT:PSS was first introduced as 
channel material in 2002.[73] In this context, PEDOT:PSS was 
chosen in particular due to its widespread commercial availa-
bility and significantly higher electrical conductivity, which can 
reach up to ≈3000 S cm−1 depending on processing and treat-
ments,[74] compared to PPy and PANI.[73] Additionally, PEDOT 
and PEDOT:PSS, along with derivatives of these materials, have 
been utilized as charge storage materials due to their broad 
electroactive responses and high volumetric capacitances.[75–78] 
This combination of high charge transporting, charge storage 
capabilities, and widespread availability made PEDOT:PSS an 
ideal material for OECT research. Indeed, devices based on 
PEDOT:PSS demonstrated a gm approaching 1.2 mS, τON and 
τOFF of 0.5 and 0.02 s respectively (for a channel w of 200 µm) 
and on–off ratios in excess of 105. Processability was also 
improved as the devices were fabricated on flexible substrates 
utilizing standard screen-printing techniques and afforded fully 
functional devices that were able to operate under ambient 
conditions. Since then the popularity of PEDOT:PSS has fur-
ther increased, in particular due to its low-cost and availability 
as either aqueous dispersions or precast films. Consequently, 
the ion-to-electron conversion capabilities of PEDOT:PSS-based 
OECTs have been vastly improved over the last decade, with 
switching speeds for PEDOT:PSS nowadays reaching values 
for τON and τOFF around 100 µs (for a channel w of 15 µm, l 
of 6  µm, and d of 80  nm).[79] High switching speeds are rel-
evant for OECTs in biological sensing, as several physiological 
processes occur in the millisecond range, such as neuronal 
action potentials, thus requiring adequate devices for signal 
recording.[80] Additional investigations into the switching 
speeds of PEDOT:PSS-based OECTs revealed that the main 
factor limiting the switching speeds in such devices was 
the ionic circuit, i.e. the transport of ions into and out of the 
channel, thus leaving room for improvement in the coming 
years.[39]
Great strides in the optimization of PEDOT:PSS’ gm have 
also been made over the years, with the best performing 
device now reaching 4.0 mS.[39] An interesting finding in these 
results was that high gm values could be preserved also after 
significant mechanical deformation, further highlighting the 
all-round benefits conferred by a PEDOT:PSS channel. An 
alternative strategy to improve PEDOT:PSS’ performance 
can be achieved by the addition of an additive, such as eth-
ylene glycol, during active layer casting. Here ethylene gly-
col’s function is to fine-tune the morphology of the channel 
with respect to its ionic and electronic mobility. Studies have 
shown that upon augmenting the ethylene glycol content, film 
heterogeneity, domain purity, and PEDOT’s π–π aggregation 
increase.[81,82] These changes in turn had opposing effects 
on the ionic and electronic charge transport, whereby ionic 
conductivity suffered from the denser PEDOT rich domains, 
while electronic mobility significantly benefited. Ultimately, 
the best OECT performance was established at 5% ethylene 
glycol content, which struck the best balance between these 
opposing factors.[82] Despite the various attractive features of 
PEDOT:PSS highlighted above, one disadvantage is the acidic 
nature of its PSS, leading to corrosion in printheads and mate-
rials surrounding the active layer. A novel family of PEDOT 
derivatives was therefore devised in 2014 based on less acidic 
(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)sulfonylimide 
(TFSI) 
polyelectro-
lytes, with the anions shown in Figure 5.[83] TFSI was incor-
porated into polystyrene (PS) and polymethacrylate (PMA) 
backbones of different length, affording PEDOT:PSTFSILi100, 
PEDOT:PSTFSIK20, 
PEDOT:PSTFSIK250, 
and 
PEDOT:PMATFSILi80. OECT performance was subsequently 
evaluated. Here, devices utilizing the various styrenic counter 
anions, 
PEDOT:PSTFSILi100, 
PEDOT:PSTFSIK20, 
and 
PEDOT:PSTFSIK250, performed very well and were able to 
match the performance of state-of-the-art PEDOT:PSS devices 
in terms of both switching speeds and transconductance with 
τOFF values between 34 and 90 µs and gm between 2.5 and 
3.5 mS (for channels with a w of 100 µm, l of 10 µm, and d 
of 200 nm). PEDOT:PMATFSILi80-based devices on the other 
hand performed relatively poorly, as their gm did not reach 
even half those of PEDOT:PSS devices. This was attributed in 
part to PEDOT:PMATFSILi80’s low hole conductivity, around 
30 times lower than PEDOT:PSS’ as well as its lower swelling 
ability, leading to reduced ion transport.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 5.  Representative chemical structures of PEDOT and various PEDOT derivatives including PEDOT:PSS and alternative polyanions.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (7 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
While PEDOT:PSS as a channel material significantly advanced 
the performance of OECTs in terms of device gm, switching 
speeds and stability, PEDOT:PSS still presents several drawbacks 
including its: i) highly complex structure, limiting its use as a 
model for polymer architecture–device performance investiga-
tions, ii) inability to be fully reduced to its charge neutral form, 
thereby incurring lower on–off ratios than could be achieved by 
alternative channel materials, and iii) limited volumetric capaci-
tance, arising from the bulky nature of PSS severely reducing 
the “active” ratio of the material.[32,84] To tackle these limitations, 
the last 4 years have witnessed the development of a library of 
novel OECT materials, based on both conjugated polyelectrolytes 
(CPEs) and glycolated semiconducting polymers (GSPs).
2014 witnessed the first report of a CPE for OECT applications,  
namely PTHS, which was based on a thiophene backbone 
and hexanesulfonate side chains, see Figure  6.[85] The design 
rationale behind PTHS was to combine the high hole mobility 
intrinsic to polythiophenes with the hydrophilic nature of sul-
fonates thereby ensuring efficient ion transport in and out 
of the channel as well as circumventing the need to include 
the inert polystyrene scaffold required for PEDOT:PSS.[86,87] 
Moreover, previous investigations into CPEs revealed PTHS 
to have the highest hole mobility in OFET devices amongst a 
series of polythiophene CPE derivatives.[88] The lack of any 
electron-donating oxygen substituents directly conjugated with 
the polythiophene backbone also shifted the HOMO of PTHS 
to a sufficiently low energy to prevent self-doping or doping 
in ambient conditions, allowing the OECTs to be operated in 
accumulation mode. Optimized devices gave a maximum gm of  
2.0 mS at a VG of −0.8 V, on–off ratios of 700, and τON of 0.4 ms 
(for a channel with a w of 250 µm, l of 5 µm, and d of 60 nm). 
The rather slow temporal response in devices was attributed 
to a relatively low ionic conductivity, which in turn could also 
rationalize the lower performance of PTHS-based OECTs com-
pared to their PEDOT:PSS counterparts.
Poly(4-(2,3-dihydrothieno-(3,4-b)-(1,4)dioxin-2-yl-methoxy)-
1-butanesulfonic acid, sodium salt) (PEDOT-S), shown in Figure 6, 
was first reported in 1998 and has a polymer backbone that closely 
resembles that of PEDOT.[89] The key difference between the two 
species lies in the additional sulfonate functionalized alkyl chain 
grafted onto the 3,4-ethylenedioxy bridge of each PEDOT-S repeat 
unit, conferring it with polyelectrolyte properties. Extensive evalu-
ation of PEDOT-S as an OECT channel material was performed 
from 2015 onward, by fabricating devices based on either pristine 
PEDOT-S or in blends with other CPEs. PEDOT-S was originally 
chosen as a channel material due to its high electrical conductivity 
and high redox stability. These properties were reflected in the 
high gm of 16.2 mS at a VG of +0.2 V obtained in devices, which 
then represented the highest gm obtained in OECTs.[45] The rela-
tively low on–off ratio obtained, 650, was comparable to that of 
PTHS, while switching speeds were significantly slower. A short-
coming of the devices was also their depletion mode of operation, 
thus PEDOT-S was blended with another CPE that operated in 
accumulation mode, sodium poly(2-(3-thienyl)ethoxy-4-butylsul-
fonate) (PTEBS), in ratios of 1:1, 2:3, and 1:2. The low fraction 
of PEDOT-S in the blends was chosen to avoid depletion type 
device characteristics. OECTs fabricated from the various PEDOT-
S:PTEBS blends afforded slightly lower gms compared to neat 
PEDOT-S devices, with values between 9.0 and 12.0 mS. On–
off ratios were similar to those of PEDOT-S; however, switching 
times were improved by a factor of 2–5 as a result of the rough 
fibrillar morphology, which enhanced ion transport. One key lim-
itation of each of the PEDOT-S-based devices was their solubility 
in water hence the necessity to employ an ionic liquid, BMIMBF4, 
as the electrolyte to allow for their operation. As a result, their 
application as sensing elements for biological applications that 
typically occur in aqueous solvents may be limited. The hydro-
philic/hydrophobic character of PEDOT-S-based CPEs was later 
adjusted by counterion exchange with ammonium salts, specifi-
cally nonylammonium chloride ((Nonyl)NH3Cl) and dioctylam-
monium chloride ((Oct)2NH2Cl) as these cations were found to 
impart processability in organic solvents while preventing CPE 
dissolution in water.[36] The resulting polymers, PEDOT-S:(Nonyl)
NH3 and PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2, were prepared from PEDOT-S by 
addition of excess ammonium salts, whereby the equilibrium was 
further pushed toward the resulting ammonium CPEs by precipi-
tation from an aqueous solvent. OECT performances of PEDOT-
S:(Nonyl)NH3 and PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 were evaluated under 
aqueous conditions giving maximum gms of 7.0 and 11.0 mS, 
respectively. For PEDOT-S:(Nonyl)NH3-based devices, severe 
hysteresis was observed in their transfer curves, indicating only 
limited reversibility of the ion injection/ejection process. This 
behavior was further complicated by the hybrid mode of opera-
tion and “overcharging” effect of PEDOT-S:(Nonyl)NH3 leading 
to a highly complex and oddly shaped transconductance curve. 
Interestingly, these features could not be observed in PEDOT-
S:(Oct)2NH2-based OECTs, leading to speculation of the different 
morphologies of PEDOT-S:(Nonyl)NH3 and PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 
to account for these differences. Stability measurements were 
also conducted and further supported the varying reversibility of 
the ion transport process in the two CPEs, with PEDOT-S:(Nonyl)
NH3 retaining 71% of its initial electroactivity after 100 cycles and 
PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 not showing any signs of degradation after 
>104 cycles.
Recently, OECT performance was increased by exploiting 
the synergies between the two previously developed strategies 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 6.  Chemical structures of the various conjugated polyelectrolytes used as OECT channel materials.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (8 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
(blending of two CPEs and cation substitution).[90] The starting 
point in these studies was PTHS, which was evaluated as the first 
channel material and achieved a gm of 12.2 mS, an on–off ratio 
of 3.1 × 104, and τON and τOFF of 428 ms and 62 ms, respectively 
(for a channel with a w of 1125 µm, l of 20 µm, and d of 133 nm). 
The next step involved fabricating devices with a 1:1 blend of 
PTHS:PEDOT-S. These had superior performance with a gm of 
13.7 mS, an on–off ratio of 8.8 × 104, and τON and τOFF values 
of 91 and 16 ms (for a channel with a w of 1125 µm, l of 20 µm, 
and d of 102 nm), respectively. The final and crucial step in these 
investigations, involved replacement of PEDOT-S by PEDOT-
S:(Oct)2NH2 in the blends, yielding PTHS:PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2. 
PTHS:PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 displayed improved gm of 15.3 mS 
and switching speeds of τON and τOFF of 79 and 11  ms (for a 
channel with a w of 1125 µm, l of 20 µm, and d of 112 nm) com-
pared to PTHS:PEDOT-S, while the on–off ratio of 4.4 × 104 was 
lower. Device stability also improved from 59% for PTHS:PEDOT-
S to 88% for PTHS:PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2 after 2 × 103 cycles; how-
ever, neither of these values matched the 90% retention of ISD 
seen in the PTHS devices. Although strictly speaking, device per-
formance was not improved with respect to each metric, overall 
this design strategy proved to be very successful considering its 
simplicity and potential applicability to future CPE systems.
3.3. GSPs
An exciting new class of materials in the domain of OECTs 
comprises semiconducting polymers with pendant ethylene 
glycol chains. In simple terms, in common with CPEs, the 
π-conjugated system of the GSP backbones is responsible for 
electronic charge transport, while the hydrophilic side chains 
are designed for efficient ion transport. Ample evidence in the 
literature however suggests that the positioning and length 
of oxygen bearing side chains also strongly impacts the opto-
electronic and morphological properties of semiconducting 
polymers.[91–93] The first report on glycolated semiconducting 
polymers for OECT applications was published in 2016 and 
involved the synthesis of polymers containing either a glycolated 
benzodithiophene or bithiophene unit, see Figure  7.[32] These 
monomers were chosen specifically, as both: i) allowed the first 
oxygen atom of their ethylene glycol chains to be directly grafted 
onto the polymer backbone, without the presence of any carbon 
spacers, thereby benefiting from its electron-donating nature 
and ii) afford highly planar polymer backbones, thereby repli-
cating some of the advantageous molecular features presented 
by PEDOT:PSS. Homo- or copolymerization by Stille crosscou-
pling of the abovementioned moieties with either thiophene or 
bithiophene yielded five polymers: gBDT, gBDT-T, gBDT-2T, 
gBDT-g2T, and g2T-T. OECTs were subsequently fabricated for 
each polymer and revealed substantially inferior peak transcon-
ductances for those based on glycolated benzodithiophene 
compared to those based on glycolated bithiophene. The low 
performance of gBDT, gBDT-T, and gBDT-2T was attributed 
to their meager hole mobilities around 5  ×  10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, 
partially a consequence of their relatively large π-stacking dis-
tances of 3.7  Å. Furthermore, gBDT, gBDT-T, and gBDT-2T 
all featured relatively poor electrochemical properties, partially 
due to their relatively low-lying HOMOs around −4.85 eV, and 
demonstrated in their scarce electrochromic activity, which is 
indicative of the inherent difficulty to electrochemically dope 
the polymers. From a molecular point of view, these findings 
were partially linked to the limited ability of the glycolated ben-
zodithiophene unit to afford highly planar backbone structures, 
compared to the glycolated bithiophene unit. In this aspect, 
the planarizing SO interactions in the glycolated bithiophene 
moiety were particularly beneficial, affording dihedral angles 
around the central CC bond close to 0°. A direct consequence 
of this molecular feature were the 0.4  eV higher HOMOs of 
gBDT-g2T and g2T-T as well as the appearance of a significantly 
more intense polaron absorption band during spectroelectro-
chemical measurements. Ultimately devices based on gBDT-
g2T and g2T-T were able to achieve gms of 0.47 and 7.9 mS, 
respectively, whereby g2T-T’s tighter π-stacking distances and 
its preferential edge-on orientation on substrates were identi-
fied as the main causes for its higher hole mobilities hence per-
formance. g2T-T’s transconductance was further enhanced by 
changing casting technique and optimizing device dimensions, 
culminating in a then unprecedented gm of 21 mS with on–off 
ratios of 2.6 × 105. To unambiguously prove g2T-T’s superior gm 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 7.  Chemical structures of the various p-type glycolated semiconducting polymers used as OECT channel materials.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (9 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
compared to PEDOT:PSS-based devices, the gms of a set of ten 
devices for each material with varying channel geometries were 
fabricated, each confirming the above results.
In a follow-up study the performance and stability of 
polymers based on a glycolated benzodithiophene unit were 
further improved.[94] In that instance, glycolated benzodithio-
phene was copolymerized with thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT) 
and 3,3’-dimethoxy-2,2’-bithiophene, affording gBDT-TT and 
gBDT-MeOT2, respectively (shown in Figure 7). Compared to the 
gBDT-2T reference, both gBDT-TT and gBDT-MeOT2 displayed 
higher HOMO energies of −4.70 and −4.31 eV, respectively, leading 
to lower turn-on voltages of the resulting OECTs. Ultimately, gBDT-
MeOT2-based devices achieved not only the highest gm of 1.82 mS 
but also stability, with on-currents stable for 300 cycles.
The newer material g2T-TT can be considered analogous 
to g2T-T, where 3,3’-bistriethyleneglycol-2,2’-bithiophene was 
retained as one of the repeat units and thiophene replaced by 
a more rigid TT moiety.[95] The effects of this substitution were 
negligible with respect to the optoelectronic properties of the 
material, as both the bandgap and HOMO–LUMO energy levels 
were virtually identical for g2T-TT and g2T-T. From a morpholog-
ical perspective, incorporation of TT however resulted in shorter 
π–π stacking distances as confirmed by 2D grazing incidence 
X-ray scattering therefore suggesting a slightly more crystalline 
character of g2T-TT. The benefit of this feature was reflected in 
the augmented hole mobility of g2T-TT compared to that of g2T-
T, with values of 0.95 and 0.28  cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Ulti-
mately, this also resulted in the highest reported transconduct-
ance for OECTs, to date, with a gm of 27 mS. Switching times for 
g2T-TT were also rapid, with τON of 420 µs and τOFF of 43 µs (for 
a channel with a w of 100 µm and l of 10 µm), on–off ratios were 
in a similar regime of 105 compared to g2T-T.
Very recently, a new polymer backbone, ProDOT(OE)-
DMP (shown in Figure  7), based on alternating an oligoeth-
ylene glycol functionalized ProDOT with an unfunctionalized 
ProDOT has been reported as an OECT channel material.[96] 
ProDOT was selected over 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) 
as a monomer due the facile chemical modification of its pro-
pylene bridge, allowing for the incorporation of solubilizing 
chains, while retaining some of EDOT’s highly electron rich 
nature. From a synthetic point of view ProDOT(OE)-DMP rep-
resented a first in the field of OECTs, due to its synthesis by 
direct(hetero)arylation polymerization (DHAP) rather than 
by the conventional Stille crosscoupling approach, which has 
been shown to leave residual tin in polymers even after end-
capping, soxhlet, and additional purification steps.[57] In the 
context of in vivo applications of OECTs this is a particularly 
attractive synthetic feature as DHAP foregoes the need of any 
organotin intermediates, which are known to be highly toxic 
to organisms and DHAP has been shown to leave less residual 
metal in polymers than other ponlymerization methods.[97,98] 
Ultimately, OECTs based on ProDOT(OE)-DMP afforded on–off 
ratios in excess of 105, similar to those of the 3,3’-bistriethylene-
glycol-2,2’-bithiophene-based polymers and higher than those 
of current CPEs. However, ProDOT(OE)-DMP’s maximum 
gm of 0.62 mS is relatively low compared to g2T-TT. This was 
predominantly due to ProDOT(OE)-DMP’s 15-fold lower hole 
mobility, likely arising from its twisted seven membered rings 
bearing neopentyl linkages on the ProDOT units, reducing 
long range order in polymer films. Notably, this is also the first 
example of a glycolated OECT material to be designed around 
the backbone’s capacitive behavior, high electrochromic con-
trast, and high electrochemical stability, rather than from modi-
fication of a typical OFET or OPV repeat unit design.
A summary of the molecular characteristics of the various 
channel materials employed, including the number average 
molecular weight (Mn), dispersity (Đ), degree of polymeriza-
tion (Xn), and analytical technique employed is given in Table 1. 
The molecular weight of PPy and PANI cannot be determined 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Table 1.  Summary of the molecular characteristics of the various 
channel materials employed, including the number average molecular 
weight (
n
M ), dispersity (Đ), degree of polymerization (Xn) and analytical 
technique employed.
Channel material
Mn [kDa]
Đ
Xn
Analytical techniquea)
PTHS[85]
42.0
1.09
82
GPC (THF)
PTHS[90]
18.1b)
1.14b)
74b)
GPC (THF)b)
18.5b)
1.02b)
75b)
MALDI-TOF MSb)
PEDOT-S[45]
–
–
–
–
PEDOT-S[36]
–c)
–c)
–c)
–c)
PEDOT-S[90,99]
1.7
3.2
5
GPC (–)
PTEBS[45]
–
–
–
–
PEDOT-S:(Nonyl)NH3[36]
–
–
–
–
PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2[36]
–
–
–
–
PEDOT-S:(Oct)2NH2[90]
–
–
–
–
gBDT[32]
4.2
1.5
8
GPC (CB)
gBDT-T[32]
–
–
–
–
gBDT-2T[32]
–
–
–
–
gBDT-g2T[32]
22.1
1.9
22
GPC (DMF)
g2T-T[32]
62.5
1.6
109
GPC (DMF)
gBDT-TT[94]
–
–
–
–
gBDT-MeOT2[94]
–d)
–d)
–d)
MALDI-TOF MSd)
g2T-TT[95]
10.0
2.0
16
GPC (CHCl3:DMF, 5:1)
ProDOT(OE)-DMP[96]
22.5
2.0
31
GPC (CHCl3)
p(gNDI-gT2)[100]
–d)
–d)
–d)
–d)
p(gNDI-T2)[100]
–
–
–
–
P-0[101]
18.0
1.8
19
GPC (CB)
P-10[101]
18.4
1.8
19
GPC (CB)
P-25[101]
15.3
1.8
15
GPC (CB)
P-50[101]
19.0
1.6
19
GPC (CB)
P-75[101]
16.7
1.4
15
GPC (CB)
P-90[101]
7.8
1.6
7
GPC (CB)
P-100[101]
7.2
1.3
7
GPC (CB)
BBL[102]
–
–
–
–
a)Analytical measurement performed either by gel permeation chromatography 
(GPC) with instrument calibrated against polystyrene standards or matrix assisted 
laser desorption ionization spectroscopy-time of flight mass spectrometry 
(MALDI-TOF MS). The various GPC solvents employed are tetrahydrofuran 
(THF), chlorobenzene (CB), dimethylformamide (DMF), chloroform (CHCl3). 
b)Molecular weight characterization was performed on the precursor polymer 
P3BrHT; c)Structures with up to 16 repeat units detected by matrix assisted laser 
desorption ionization spectroscopy (MALDI); d)Structures with up to seven repeat 
units detected by MALDI.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (10 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
via conventional methods as the polymers are prepared elec-
trochemically and are insoluble films on electrodes. Addition-
ally, dispersions of PEDOT, such as PEDOT:PSS, are typically 
not characterized in terms of molecular weight as they are 
insoluble doped oligomers in a soluble polymer matrix. It can 
be seen from Table 1 that there is a large range of molecular 
weights from the materials studied and the role of molecular 
weight in OECT polymers is currently unclear.
4. n-Type OECT Channel Materials
While each of the previously discussed materials for OECTs 
has been based on hole transporting semiconducting or con-
ducting polymers, we now discuss n-type OECT channel mate-
rials, which did not appear until 2016.[100] The development 
of n-type materials is however crucial, especially for the appli-
cation of OECTs as biological sensing elements, such as for 
cation sensing or metabolite sensing via enzyme conjugation, 
which generally operates by an electron-transfer rather than 
hole-transfer process.[33] Furthermore, n-type channel materials 
are also important for the realization of complementary logic 
circuits, thereby expanding the capabilities of OECTs.
p(gNDI-gT2) is based on an alternating naphthalene-1,4,5,8-
tetracarboxylic diimide (NDI) and bithiophene (T2) polymer 
backbone, similar to the well-known polymer N2200, with each 
of the two building blocks functionalized with ethylene glycol 
chains, shown in Figure 8.[100] An analogue of p(gNDI-gT2) in 
which the glycol chains have been omitted from the bithiophene 
moiety was also synthesized, p(gNDI-T2); however, compared 
to p(gNDI-gT2) did not exhibit ambipolar charge transport 
properties due to its 0.7  eV lower lying HOMO. Recently, a 
series of NDI-T2-based polymers with slightly modified and 
elongated ethylene glycol chains compared to p(gNDI-T2)  
was reported.[101] In this study the linear ethylene glycol 
side chains were gradually replaced by branched alkyl ones, 
affording seven random copolymers: P100, P90, P75, P50, P25, 
P10, and P0, with glycol chain percentages of 100, 90, 75, 50, 
25, 10, and 0, respectively. For the polymers with a glycol side 
chain percentage <75%, no functional n-type OECT behavior 
was observed due to the inability of these polymers to charge 
volumetrically. These findings were corroborated both by quartz 
crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring and CV, indi-
cating poor swelling behavior and ion uptake. Alternatively, fully 
functional OECTs were fabricated for polymers incorporating 
higher glycol side chain fractions (P75, P90, and P100), all 
showing similar performances and reaching a maximum gm 
of 1.1 µS. Nevertheless, neither of these could compete with 
p(gNDI-gT2)-based devices, where peak gm values of 21.7 µS 
and 13.4 µS and on–off ratios of 3.2 × 103 and 2.0 × 102 were 
obtained for n-type and p-type operation, respectively. Although 
these results are encouraging, significant research efforts are 
still required to improve the n-type OECT performance of GSPs 
compared to their already excellent p-type analogues. In par-
ticular, their low electron mobilities around 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 
must be improved substantially to minimize this performance 
gap. It is possible that the localized nature of the charge car-
riers in NDI-T2-based polymers, which contributes to their low 
solid-state conductivities when doped, may be limiting their 
OECT performance.[103] In this aspect, a departure from the 
current donor–acceptor polymer structures toward all-acceptor 
ones may offer the desired outcomes. The potential benefits of 
such an approach have already been demonstrated in the lit-
erature. For example, when taking the donor–acceptor polymer 
N2200 as reference (which can be considered as structurally 
similar to p(gNDI-gT2)), n-type doping performed with a range 
of dopants afforded a poor maximum solid state conductance 
(σmax) ranging between 3.0 × 10−3 and 8.0 × 10−3 S cm−1, despite 
achieving a near quantitative doping reaction.[104,105] Substitu-
tion of the electron-donating bithiophene comonomer in N2200 
with more electron-withdrawing ethynylene and diethynylben-
zothiadiazole units, on the other hand, afforded polymers with 
improved σmax, spanning between 0.07 and 0.45 S cm−1.[105] 
UV–vis spectroscopy was employed to study the origin of this 
behavior, as the P1 transition energy and the extent of neutral 
polymer quenching by each charge can be used as a measure 
of the polaron delocalization length. For the reference N2200 
polymer, a polaron delocalization length of 1.25  nm was esti-
mated. On the other hand, for the ethynylene and diethynylb-
enzothiadiazole based polymers, significantly longer polaron 
delocalization lengths between 3.00 and 4.50 nm were obtained, 
thus highlighting their more delocalized nature, which in turn 
was attributed to their better charge transport ability. One of 
the most interesting points to note in these studies is that the 
polymers incorporating the ethynylene and diethynylbenzothia-
diazole moieties had OFET electron mobilities approximately 
one order of magnitude lower than that of the N2200 reference, 
indicating that the design rules for high performance OFET  
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 8.  Chemical structures of the various n-type semiconducting polymers used as OECT channel materials.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (11 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
applications do not necessarily hold true 
for n-type doping applications. Similar 
conclusions were also found when com-
paring N2200 with the ladder-type polymer, 
poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) 
(BBL).[103] In this instance n-type doping of 
N2200 once again afforded a σmax around  
10−3 S cm−1, whilst BBL’s fully n-type and rigid 
polymer backbone was shown to boost the 
polaron delocalization length over three rather 
than a single repeat unit, which was subse-
quently used as justification for BBL’s almost 
500-fold larger σmax. Because BBL’s compara-
tively high σmax was envisaged to potentially 
benefit OECT performance, n-type OECTs 
employing BBL as a channel material were 
recently fabricated.[102] The resulting devices 
achieved a gm and on–off values of 9.7 mS  
and 6000, respectively. However, when 
taking into consideration device geometry, 
the performance of BBL only resulted in an 
≈2.5 times higher transconductance com-
pared to p(gNDI-gT2), thus indicating that 
σmax alone may also not be an ideal param-
eter for predicting a material’s OECT perfor-
mance. Additionally, one drawback of BBL-
based OECTs was their very slow switching 
speeds with τON of 0.9 s and τOFF of 0.2 s (for a channel with a 
w of 39 mm, l of 20 µm, and d of 180 nm), indicating ion migra-
tion into the polymer film as the limiting element in device 
performance. The inclusion of hydrophilic side chains into the 
polymer structure could potentially provide a straightforward 
solution toward this issue, as it is known that ions have higher 
mobilities through side chain rich regions of films. However, 
care must be taken to avoid disrupting the conductive polymer 
backbone. Ultimately, the OECT performance obtained from 
both NDI-T2 and all-acceptor based polymers are still lagging 
those of their p-type analogues thus highlighting the necessity 
to develop better performing materials. The molecular weight 
information of the n-type polymers discussed is listed in Table 1.
5. General Design Principles
5.1. p-Type Design
Following the initial use of PPy and PANI, the majority of high 
performance OECT active materials to date can be divided into 
two general classes: those based on PEDOT and those based 
on known OFET polymer structures. This is unsurprising as 
doped PEDOT and PEDOT derivatives can have high solid-
state electrical conductivities and a large amount of research 
has been performed developing design rules for transistor 
materials. Despite the limited range of structures previously 
explored, general design features for future materials can be 
outlined.
From all of the high performing materials it can be seen that 
backbone planarity is of utmost importance. Planar backbones 
can afford tight π-stacking, depending on additional factors 
including side chains, which benefits hole and electron trans-
port within the film. This was previously discussed, with  
g2T-TT showing closer π-stacking and a higher transconduct-
ance compared to g2T-T. However, care must be taken as it 
has been shown with both PEDOT:PSS and alkyl functional-
ized polymers that increased order in a film can reduce electro-
chemical switching speeds due to slow ion transport through 
ordered domains.[82]
Another important consideration is the ionization potential 
(IP) of the polymer, which is primarily dictated by the HOMO 
of the polymer film. Foremost, the IP must be sufficiently 
small to allow doping of the polymer within the electrochem-
ical potential window of water (H2O/O2 oxidation at pH 7 of 
5.3 eV and H+/H2 reduction at pH 7 of 4.05 eV).[106,107] Poly-
mers with small IPs also tend to be more stable to repeated 
electrochemical cycling, see Figure 9. However, an excessively 
shallow IP will result in the polymer being doped, and hence 
conducting, under ambient conditions, potentially leading to 
depletion mode behavior, which may or may not be reversible 
depending on the nature of the polymer and generally results 
in lower on/off ratios. 3-alkoxy and 3,4-dialkoxy substituents 
on thiophenes have been found to be effective at reducing the 
IP (raising the HOMO) and increasing the electrochemical  
stability of polymers under OECT operation. This improved  
stability can come from either lowering the IP so that other 
functionalities do not degrade, such as with gBDT-2T and 
gBDT-MeOT2,[94] or by blocking positions on the polymer chain 
where degradation/crosslinking could occur, such as is the case 
with ProDOT(OE)-DMP and other dioxythiophene polymers.[96] 
Fine tuning of the IP by changing the relative number of 
these units and the steric bulk/twisting of the alkyl (and some-
times aryl) groups has been extensively studied in the organic 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033
Figure 9.  Ionization potentials and onset of oxidation of various p-type OECT channel mate-
rials. The gray shaded region indicates the onset of water oxidation at 25 °C and pH = 7, rela-
tive to a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. All ionization potentials are given relative to vacuum and 
potentials relative to a Ag/AgCl reference electrode based on a potential of 4.67 eV relative to 
vacuum; exact values against Fc/Fc+ may vary slightly. The onset of oxidation for the p-type 
OECT channel materials have been measured employing water as the solvent and NaCl/H2O 
as the electrolyte.

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (12 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
electronics, electrochromic[108–111] and computational litera-
ture[112–114] and will not be discussed in detail here.
5.2. n-Type Semiconducting Polymer Backbone Design
With the exception of BBL, only NDI based systems have so far 
been studied for n-type OECTs, thus limiting the design rules 
that can be extrapolated from the above discussion. Nonethe-
less, it can be concluded that the primary factor limiting n-type 
material OECT performance so far has been their low electron 
mobility and will thus have to be the main parameter of focus 
in future studies. Considering that N2200, which is structur-
ally similar to the NDI-T2 based OECT channel materials, dis-
plays a good electron mobility in excess of 0.8 cm2 V−1 s−1 in 
OFETs, the low mobilities of NDI-T2 based channel materials 
is somewhat surprising.[115] Although the origin of this discrep-
ancy between electron mobility in OFETs and OECTs has so far 
not been elucidated, a potential explanation may be due to the 
use of an aqueous electrolyte in OECTs. Unlike in OFETs that 
can be operated under inert atmosphere conditions, the pres-
ence of water in OECTs requires the electron affinity (EA) of 
the channel material to be at least lower than −4.05 eV relative 
to vacuum to fall within the solvent’s electrochemical stability 
window. As the EAs of both p(gNDI-gT2) and BBL lie close 
to −4.0  eV, neither of these polymers may have a sufficiently 
low EA to fully prevent any undesirable proton reduction and 
simultaneous dedoping of the channel material, which in turn 
could explain their low mobilities in OECTs.
An alternative explanation for the low electron mobility 
observed in n-type channel materials compared to their p-type 
counterparts could also be due to polaron charge balancing 
occurring by the influx of Na+ ions rather than Cl− ones. As 
demonstrated in the literature, the influx of Na+ ions into p-type 
OECT channel materials has been shown to be accompanied 
by the concomitant influx of two to four water molecules per 
cation, whilst the influx of Cl− ones by 10 per anion.[116,117] 
Consequently, it is to be expected that the ionic charge on Na+ 
ions will not be screened as efficiently as those on Cl− ones. A 
likely ramification of this is stronger electrostatic interactions 
between the electron polaron on the polymer backbone and the 
influx of cations, essentially leading to a charge pinning effect 
and reducing the electron mobility in n-type channel materials.
5.3. Side Chain Designs
Currently, the highest reported transconductance values and 
on/off ratios have been obtained from materials utilizing oli-
goether side chains and these are currently the side chain of 
choice for new OECT materials. When directly grafted onto the 
polymer backbone, the alkyl-aryl-ether linkage simultaneously 
provides electron donation, lowering the IP and stabilizing the 
oxidized (polaron or bipolaron) states, and leads to favorable 
noncovalent SO interactions between rings, potentially 
resulting in more planar backbones. Moreover, the widespread 
commercial availability and low cost of ethylene glycol chains 
with varying chain lengths and functionalities further add to 
their attractiveness.
However, the optimal length of these glycol side chains has 
yet to be studied, with all current p-type GSPs using trieth-
ylene glycol monomethyl chains, selected to balance solubility 
with backbone packing. Changing the length of this chain and 
experimenting with branching points could be valuable for next 
generation materials with higher transconductances and/or 
improved processability. It is timely for this to now be inves-
tigated, as side chain engineering has been extensively studied 
for OFET and OPV discrete molecules and polymers and, to a 
lesser extent, for electrochromic polymers. The random or sys-
tematic incorporation of alkyl side chains into glycolated poly-
mers, such as was carried out with N2200 derivatives, could 
also prove fruitful. Asymmetric alkylation of DPP with an alkyl 
and a glycol chain was recently reported for discrete molecule 
OFETs and could potentially also be a valuable alternative for 
OECT materials.[118] An alternative option is implementation of 
different hydrophilic side chains. One example of this involved 
a polymer based on a DPP backbone, this time functionalized 
with lysine side chains, that was used for neural cell growth.[119] 
Unfortunately, there was no report of OECT performance, most 
likely as the DPP backbone has an excessively low IP such that 
efficient doping in an aqueous environment is not possible. 
Carboxylic acid side chains have also been shown to allow for 
stable redox switching of polymers for >105 cycles in aqueous 
electrolytes and even using blood as the electrolyte.[78,120] How-
ever, these materials have yet to be studies in OECTs.
6. Conclusions and Outlook
Since its inception in 1986, the organic electrochemical tran-
sistor has become a well-established device in the bioelectronics 
community, in particular due to its excellent transducing prop-
erties, relatively simple device structure, and applicability for 
signal recording in biological systems.[47] Compared to dielec-
tric and electrolyte-gated organic field effect transistors, the 
operating mechanism of OECTs differs significantly as doping 
of the semiconductor channel is not restricted to its interface 
but occurs throughout the bulk of the material. Because of this 
requirement for efficient operation, organic semiconductors 
capable of conducting both ionic and electronic charge carriers 
have emerged as successful channel materials. Great strides 
have been made over the past 15 years in the development of 
increasingly better performing channel materials, especially 
with the introduction of PEDOT:PSS as a channel material. 
Here, the high hole transporting ability, chemical stability, 
and in particular the widespread commercial availability of 
PEDOT:PSS have cemented its status as the golden standard. 
Despite these attractive properties, its highly complex structure 
has severely hampered its use as a model for polymer struc-
ture–property relationship investigations, thus suggesting its 
use arises predominantly out of convenience rather than out 
of performance alone. To tackle this drawback, the past 5 years 
have witnessed a rapid increase in the number of novel OECT 
materials, in particular p-type ones, based on either conjugated 
polyelectrolytes or glycolated semiconducting polymers. Both 
material classes have shown tremendous success as channel 
materials and have repeatedly outperformed PEDOT:PSS-
based references, which is attributed to their higher reported 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (13 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
volumetric capacitances, while providing the field with 
numerous insights into the molecular design of channel mate-
rials for efficient OECT operation. The departure from the 
PEDOT:PSS backbone has also enabled the evolution of n-type 
channel materials; however, their performance has yet to con-
sistently match their p-type counterparts. While further devel-
opment of p-type materials will be of value to the field, there is 
a greater need and room for growth in n-type semiconductors, 
especially due to their relevance in biological sensing including 
both metabolite and cation recognition.
Recently, advances in the synthesis of the channel materials 
have also been achieved. In this context, a shift from conven-
tional Stille polymerization conditions toward direct aryla-
tion polymerizations may offer simpler, faster, and more atom 
economical synthetic routes toward future channel materials. 
Despite this synthetic progress, a frequently encountered issue 
for both p-type and n-type channel materials still lies in their 
limited solubility in common organic solvents, which can not 
only limit their molecular weight and processability but also 
complicate their molecular weight determination. A potential 
solution to forego this problem in the future may be through the 
introduction of longer or branched ethylene glycol side chains. 
These may however complicate the purification of the resulting 
synthetic intermediates by conventional techniques employed in 
the field of organic electronics, especially due to their expected 
increased solubility in aqueous media and waxy nature. This in 
turn could further convolute the synthesis of the OECT channel 
materials, by creating stoichiometric imbalances during the 
polymerization step, which according to the Carothers equation 
would result in low molecular weight polymers.
Lastly, we also expect advances to be made in device fabrica-
tion methods and architecture to further boost OECT perfor-
mance. This follows from the discussion that drop-cast active 
layers have, for example, been demonstrated to achieve gms 
almost twice as high as their spin-cast counterparts, while 
employing identical channel dimensions.[32] The choice of 
electrolyte may also offer further performance improvements. 
Although most publications in the field employ a 0.1 m sodium 
chloride solution as the electrolyte of choice, others have also 
been explored.[36] In this context it is nontrivial to note that dif-
ferent electrolyte anions have shown to not only modulate the 
maximum doping level achieved in polymers but also transport 
properties in OECTs.
Overall, the understanding and performance of OECTs have 
been notably improved in the past 10 years, nonetheless we expect 
that in the coming years advances in both material developments 
and device fabrication will further push the frontiers of the field.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding from KAUST and thank Engineering 
and Physical Sciences Research Council Projects EP/G037515/1, 
EP  M−005143/1, ECFP7 Project SC2 (610115), EP/N509486/1 for 
the financial support. M.M. gratefully thanks the Imperial College 
Schrödinger Scholarship for financial support.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
aqueous compatible polymers, bioelectronics, organic electrochemical 
transistors, redox active polymers, structure–property relationship
Received: October 5, 2018
Revised: November 6, 2018
Published online: December 13, 2018
[1]	 M. Berggren, A. Richter-Dahlfors, Adv. Mater. 2007, 19, 3201.
[2]	 J. Rivnay, R. M. Owens, G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 
679.
[3]	 B. C.  Albensi, in Encyclopedia of Basic Epilepsy Research (Ed:  
P. A. Schwartzkroin), Academic Press, Oxford 2009, p. 1426.
[4]	 A. L. Kip, D. U. Jeffrey, Y. Junyan, C. M. David, R. K. Daryl, J. Neural 
Eng. 2006, 3, 59.
[5]	 M.  Asplund, E.  Thaning, J.  Lundberg, A. C.  Sandberg-Nordqvist, 
B.  Kostyszyn, O.  Inganäs, H. v.  Holst, Biomed. Mater. 2009, 4, 
045009.
[6]	 D. Khodagholy, T. Doublet, P. Quilichini, M. Gurfinkel, P. Leleux, 
A.  Ghestem, E.  Ismailova, T.  Hervé, S.  Sanaur, C.  Bernard, 
G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 1575.
[7]	 K. W.  Johnson, J. J.  Mastrototaro, D. C.  Howey, R. L.  Brunelle, 
P. L.  Burden-Brady, N. A.  Bryan, C. C.  Andrew, H. M.  Rowe, 
D. J. Allen, B. W. Noffke, W. C. McMahan, R. J. Morff, D. Lipson, 
R. S. Nevin, Biosens. Bioelectron. 1992, 7, 709.
[8]	 H.  Tang, F.  Yan, P.  Lin, J.  Xu, H. L. W.  Chan, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2011, 21, 2264.
[9]	 A.-M.  Pappa, V. F.  Curto, M.  Braendlein, X.  Strakosas, 
M.  J.  Donahue, M.  Fiocchi, G. G.  Malliaras, R. M.  Owens, Adv. 
Healthcare Mater. 2016, 5, 2295.
[10]	 G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater. 1998, 10, 365.
[11]	 H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater. 2005, 17, 2411.
[12]	 J. Mei, Y. Diao, A. L. Appleton, L. Fang, Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013, 135, 6724.
[13]	 S.  Allard, M.  Forster, B.  Souharce, H.  Thiem, U.  Scherf, Angew. 
Chem., Int. Ed. 2008, 47, 4070.
[14]	 W. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 1489.
[15]	 W. Brütting, S. Berleb, A. G. Mückl, Org. Electron. 2001, 2, 1.
[16]	 B. W. D’Andrade, S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater. 2004, 16, 1585.
[17]	 B. Geffroy, P. le Roy, C. Prat, Polym. Int. 2006, 55, 572.
[18]	 C. M. Amb, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater. 2011, 23, 397.
[19]	 M. E. Abdelhamid, A. P. O’Mullane, G. A. Snook, RSC Adv. 2015, 
5, 11611.
[20]	 B. Kippelen, J.-L. Brédas, Energy Environ. Sci. 2009, 2, 251.
[21]	 K. A. Mazzio, C. K. Luscombe, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 78.
[22]	 N.  Gasparini, A.  Wadsworth, M.  Moser, D.  Baran, I.  McCulloch, 
C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8, 1703298.
[23]	 A.  Wadsworth, M.  Moser, A.  Marks, M. S.  Little, N.  Gasparini, 
C. J. Brabec, D. Baran, I. McCulloch, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, https://
doi.org/10.1039/c7cs00892a.
[24]	 E.  Stavrinidou, P.  Leleux, H.  Rajaona, D.  Khodagholy, J.  Rivnay, 
M.  Lindau, S.  Sanaur, G. G.  Malliaras, Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 
4488.
[25]	 D. T. Simon, E. O. Gabrielsson, K. Tybrandt, M. Berggren, Chem. 
Rev. 2016, 116, 13009.
[26]	 S.  Inal, J.  Rivnay, A.-O.  Suiu, G. G.  Malliaras, I.  McCulloch, Acc. 
Chem. Res. 2018, 51, 1368.
[27]	 S.  Strˇíteský, A.  Marková, J.  Vítecˇek, E.  Šafarˇíková, M.  Hrabal, 
L. Kubácˇ, L. Kubala, M. Weiter, M. Vala, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part 
A 2018, 106, 1121.
[28]	 R.  Mannerbro, M.  Ranlöf, N.  Robinson, R.  Forchheimer, Synth. 
Met. 2008, 158, 556.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (14 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
[29]	 J. Y. Wong, R. Langer, D. E. Ingber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1994, 
91, 3201.
[30]	 D.  Khodagholy, T.  Doublet, M.  Gurfinkel, P.  Quilichini, 
E.  Ismailova, P.  Leleux, T.  Herve, S.  Sanaur, C.  Bernard, 
G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. 2011, 23, H268.
[31]	 T.  Hanawa, S.  Kuwabata, H.  Hashimoto, H.  Yoneyama, Synth. 
Met. 1989, 30, 173.
[32]	 C. B.  Nielsen, A.  Giovannitti, D.-T.  Sbircea, E.  Bandiello, 
M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, M. Sessolo, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, 
J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 10252.
[33]	 A. M.  Pappa, D.  Ohayon, A.  Giovannitti, I. P.  Maria, A.  Savva, 
I.  Uguz, J.  Rivnay, I.  McCulloch, R. M.  Owens, S.  Inal, Sci. Adv. 
2018, 4, eaat0911.
[34]	 P. Lin, F. Yan, Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, 34.
[35]	 X. Strakosas, M. Bongo, R. M. Owens, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2015, 
132, n/a.
[36]	 E. Zeglio, J. Eriksson, R. Gabrielsson, N. Solin, O. Inganäs, Adv. 
Mater. 2017, 29, 1605787.
[37]	 D. T. Duong, Y. Tuchman, P. Chakthranont, P. Cavassin, R. Colucci, 
T. F. Jaramillo, A. Salleo, G. C. Faria, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2018, 4, 
1800090.
[38]	 C.  Pitsalidis, A.-M.  Pappa, M.  Porel, C. M.  Artim, G. C.  Faria, 
D. D. Duong, C. A. Alabi, S. Daniel, A. Salleo, R. M. Owens, Adv. 
Mater. 2018, 30, 1803130.
[39]	 D.  Khodagholy, J.  Rivnay, M.  Sessolo, M.  Gurfinkel, P.  Leleux, 
L. H. Jimison, E. Stavrinidou, T. Herve, S. Sanaur, R. M. Owens, 
G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2133.
[40]	 D. A. Bernards, G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2007, 17, 3538.
[41]	 F.  Cicoira, M.  Sessolo, O.  Yaghmazadeh, J. A.  DeFranco, 
S. Y. Yang, G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 1012.
[42]	 P. C.  Hütter, T.  Rothländer, A.  Haase, G.  Trimmel, B.  Stadlober, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 103, 043308.
[43]	 G. Tarabella, C. Santato, S. Y. Yang, S. Iannotta, G. G. Malliaras, 
F. Cicoira, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 123304.
[44]	 S. E. Doris, A. Pierre, R. A. Street, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1706757.
[45]	 E.  Zeglio, M.  Vagin, C.  Musumeci, F. N.  Ajjan, R.  Gabrielsson, 
X. T. Trinh, N. T. Son, A. Maziz, N. Solin, O. Inganäs, Chem. Mater. 
2015, 27, 6385.
[46]	 W. Kaim, J. Fiedler, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2009, 38, 3373.
[47]	 H. S.  White, G. P.  Kittlesen, M. S.  Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1984, 106, 5375.
[48]	 E. W. Paul, A. J. Ricco, M. S. Wrighton, J. Phys. Chem. 1985, 89, 
1441.
[49]	 S. Tanaka, T. Iso, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun. 1994, 0, 1071.
[50]	 N.  Wang, A.  Kähkönen, P.  Damlin, T.  Ääritalo, J.  Kankare, 
C. Kvarnström, Electrochim. Acta 2015, 154, 361.
[51]	 S.-C. Huang, C.-Y. Lin, Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 519.
[52]	 J. Xia, N. Masaki, K. Jiang, S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem. 2007, 17, 
2845.
[53]	 X. Cui, V. A. Lee, Y. Raphael, J. A. Wiler, J. F. Hetke, D. J. Anderson, 
D. C. Martin, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 2001, 56, 261.
[54]	 S.-C.  Luo, J.  Sekine, B.  Zhu, H.  Zhao, A.  Nakao, H.-h.  Yu, ACS 
Nano 2012, 6, 3018.
[55]	 S. P.  Ponnappa, S.  Arumugam, H. J.  Spratt, S.  Manzhos, 
A.  P.  O’Mullane, G. A.  Ayoko, P.  Sonar, J. Mater. Res. 2017, 32, 
810.
[56]	 J. Wang, G. Cai, X. Zhu, X. Zhou, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2012, 124, 
109.
[57]	 C. K.  Lo, B. R.  Gautam, P.  Selter, Z.  Zheng, S. D.  Oosterhout, 
I.  Constantinou, R.  Knitsch, R. M. W.  Wolfe, X.  Yi, J.-L.  Brédas, 
F. So, M. F. Toney, V. Coropceanu, M. R. Hansen, K. Gundogdu, 
J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 2995.
[58]	 M. Nishizawa, T. Matsue, I. Uchida, Anal. Chem. 1992, 64, 2642.
[59]	 C. O.  Baker, X.  Huang, W.  Nelson, R. B.  Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2017, 46, 1510.
[60]	 D. Kumar, R. C. Sharma, Eur. Polym. J. 1998, 34, 1053.
[61]	 A. G. MacDiarmid, Synth. Met. 1997, 84, 27.
[62]	 G. Williams, H. N. McMurray, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 2005, 
8, B42.
[63]	 P. N. Bartlett, P. R. Birkin, Anal. Chem. 1993, 65, 1118.
[64]	 P. N. Bartlett, Analyst 1998, 123, 387.
[65]	 S. K.  An. Elschner, W.  Lövenich, U.  Merker, K.  Reuter, PEDOT: 
Principles and Applications of an Intrinsically Conducting Polymer, 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL 2011.
[66]	 Q. Pei, G. Zuccarello, M. Ahlskog, O. Inganäs, Polymer 1994, 35, 
1347.
[67]	 J. C. Gustafsson, B. Liedberg, O. Inganäs, Solid State Ionics 1994, 
69, 145.
[68]	 O.  Bubnova, Z. U.  Khan, A.  Malti, S.  Braun, M.  Fahlman, 
M. Berggren, X. Crispin, Nat. Mater. 2011, 10, 429.
[69]	 D.  Alemu, H.-Y.  Wei, K.-C.  Ho, C.-W.  Chu, Energy Environ. Sci. 
2012, 5, 9662.
[70]	 F. Jonas, L. Schrader, Synth. Met. 1991, 41, 831.
[71]	 G. Heywang, F. Jonas, Adv. Mater. 1992, 4, 116.
[72]	 F.  Zhang, M.  Johansson, M. R.  Andersson, J. C.  Hummelen, 
O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater. 2002, 14, 662.
[73]	 D.  Nilsson, M.  Chen, T.  Kugler, T.  Remonen, M.  Armgarth, 
M. Berggren, Adv. Mater. 2002, 14, 51.
[74]	 M. De Keersmaecker, A. W. Lang, A. M. Österholm, J. R. Reynolds, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 31568.
[75]	 A. M. Österholm, D. E. Shen, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5, 13432.
[76]	 A. M. Österholm, J. F. Ponder, J. A. Kerszulis, J. R. Reynolds, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 13492.
[77]	 T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, J.-D. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai, W. Huang, J. Mater. 
Chem. A 2016, 4, 10493.
[78]	 A.  Lang, J. F.  Ponder, A. M.  Osterholm, N. J.  Kennard, 
R. H. Bulloch, J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 5, 23887.
[79]	 D. Khodagholy, M. Gurfinkel, E. Stavrinidou, P. Leleux, T. Herve, 
S. Sanaur, G. G. Malliaras, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99, 163304.
[80]	 P. Fromherz, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2006, 1093, 143.
[81]	 S. Inal, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4, 3942.
[82]	 J.  Rivnay, S.  Inal, B. A.  Collins, M.  Sessolo, E.  Stavrinidou, 
X.  Strakosas, C.  Tassone, D. M.  Delongchamp, G. G.  Malliaras, 
Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11287.
[83]	 S.  Inal, J.  Rivnay, A. I.  Hofmann, I.  Uguz, M.  Mumtaz, 
D.  Katsigiannopoulos, C.  Brochon, E.  Cloutet, G.  Hadziioannou, 
G. G. Malliaras, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 2016, 54, 147.
[84]	 J.  Rivnay, P.  Leleux, M.  Ferro, M.  Sessolo, A.  Williamson, 
D.  A.  Koutsouras, D.  Khodagholy, M.  Ramuz, X.  Strakosas, 
R. M. Owens, C. Benar, J.-M. Badier, C. Bernard, G. G. Malliaras, 
Sci. Adv. 2015, 1, e1400251.
[85]	 S.  Inal, J.  Rivnay, P.  Leleux, M.  Ferro, M.  Ramuz, J. C.  Brendel, 
M. M. Schmidt, M. Thelakkat, G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. 2014, 
26, 7450.
[86]	 I. McCulloch, M. Heeney, C. Bailey, K. Genevicius, I. MacDonald, 
M.  Shkunov, D.  Sparrowe, S.  Tierney, R.  Wagner, W.  Zhang, 
M.  L.  Chabinyc, R. J.  Kline, M. D.  McGehee, M. F.  Toney, Nat. 
Mater. 2006, 5, 328.
[87]	 B. H. Hamadani, D. J. Gundlach, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney, Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 2007, 91, 243512.
[88]	 J. C. Brendel, M. M. Schmidt, G. Hagen, R. Moos, M. Thelakkat, 
Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 1992.
[89]	 O.  Stéphan, P.  Schottland, P.-Y.  Le  Gall, C.  Chevrot, C.  Mariet, 
M. Carrier, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1998, 443, 217.
[90]	 E. Zeglio, M. M. Schmidt, M. Thelakkat, R. Gabrielsson, N. Solin, 
O. Inganäs, Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 4293.
[91]	 M. Leclerc, G. Daoust, Synth. Met. 1991, 41, 529.
[92]	 T.  Johansson, W.  Mammo, M.  Svensson, M. R.  Andersson, 
O. Inganäs, J. Mater. Chem. 2003, 13, 1316.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
1807033  (15 of 15)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
[93]	 X. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Ding, J. Liu, L. Wang, Angew. Chem. 2016, 
128, 10532.
[94]	 A.  Giovannitti, K. J.  Thorley, C. B.  Nielsen, J.  Li, M. J.  Donahue, 
G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 
28, 1706325.
[95]	 A.  Giovannitti, D.-T.  Sbircea, S.  Inal, C. B.  Nielsen, E.  Bandiello, 
D. A. Hanifi, M. Sessolo, G. G. Malliaras, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 12017.
[96]	 L. R.  Savagian, A. M.  Österholm, J. F.  Ponder Jr., K. J.  Barth, 
J. Rivnay, J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater. 2018, 1804647.
[97]	 R. D. Kimbrough, Environ. Health Perspect. 1976, 14, 51.
[98]	 L. A. Estrada, J. J. Deininger, G. D. Kamenov, J. R. Reynolds, ACS 
Macro Lett. 2013, 2, 869.
[99]	 K. M.  Persson, R.  Karlsson, K.  Svennersten, S.  Löffler, 
E. W. H. Jager, A. Richter-Dahlfors, P. Konradsson, M. Berggren, 
Adv. Mater. 2011, 23, 4403.
[100]	 A. Giovannitti, C. B. Nielsen, D.-T. Sbircea, S. Inal, M. Donahue, 
M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, 
I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 13066.
[101]	 A.  Giovannitti, I. P.  Maria, D.  Hanifi, M. J.  Donahue, D.  Bryant, 
K. J.  Barth, B. E.  Makdah, A.  Savva, D.  Moia, M.  Zetek, 
P. R. F. Barnes, O. G. Reid, S. Inal, G. Rumbles, G. G. Malliaras, 
J. Nelson, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 2945.
[102]	 H.  Sun, M.  Vagin, S.  Wang, X.  Crispin, R.  Forchheimer, 
M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1704916.
[103]	 S.  Wang, H.  Sun, U.  Ail, M.  Vagin, P. O. Å.  Persson, 
J.  W.  Andreasen, W.  Thiel, M.  Berggren, X.  Crispin, D.  Fazzi, 
S. Fabiano, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 10764.
[104]	 R. A.  Schlitz, F. G.  Brunetti, A. M.  Glaudell, P. L.  Miller, 
M. A. Brady, C. J. Takacs, C. J. Hawker, M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Mater. 
2014, 26, 2825.
[105]	 B. D. Naab, X. Gu, T. Kurosawa, J. W. F. To, A. Salleo, Z. Bao, Adv. 
Electron. Mater. 2016, 2, 1600004.
[106]	 D. M. de Leeuw, M. M. J. Simenon, A. R. Brown, R. E. F. Einerhand, 
Synth. Met. 1997, 87, 53.
[107]	 L.  Sigg, in Redox: Fundamentals, Processes and Applications  
(Eds: J. Schüring, H. D. Schulz, W. R. Fischer, J. Böttcher, 
 W. H. M. Duijnisveld), Springer, Berlin 2000, p. 1.
[108]	 J. A.  Kerszulis, K. E.  Johnson, M.  Kuepfert, D.  Khoshabo, 
A.  L.  Dyer, J. R.  Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. C 2015, 3, 
3211.
[109]	 J. F.  Ponder, A. M.  Österholm, J. R.  Reynolds, Macromolecules 
2016, 49, 2106.
[110]	 K. Cao, D. E. Shen, A. M. Österholm, J. A. Kerszulis, J. R. Reynolds, 
Macromolecules 2016, 49, 8498.
[111]	 J. F. Ponder, B. Schmatz, J. L. Hernandez, J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. 
Chem. C 2018, 6, 1064.
[112]	 G.  Conboy, H. J.  Spencer, E.  Angioni, A. L.  Kanibolotsky, 
N. J.  Findlay, S. J.  Coles, C.  Wilson, M. B.  Pitak, C.  Risko, 
V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas, P. J. Skabara, Mater. Horiz. 2016, 3, 
333.
[113]	 N. E. Jackson, B. M. Savoie, K. L. Kohlstedt, M. Olvera de la Cruz, 
G. C.  Schatz, L. X.  Chen, M. A.  Ratner, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 
135, 10475.
[114]	 D. J.  Pascoe, K. B.  Ling, S. L.  Cockroft, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 
139, 15160.
[115]	 H.  Yan, Z.  Chen, Y.  Zheng, C.  Newman, J. R.  Quinn, F.  Dötz, 
M. Kastler, A. Facchetti, Nature 2009, 457, 679.
[116]	 L. Q. Flagg, R. Giridharagopal, J. Guo, D. S. Ginger, Chem. Mater. 
2018, 30, 5380.
[117]	 A. Savva, S. Wustoni, S. Inal, J. Mater. Chem. C 2018, 6, 5218.
[118]	 C. K.  Lo, C.-Y.  Wang, S. D.  Oosterhout, Z.  Zheng, X.  Yi,  
C.  Fuentes-Hernandez, F.  So, V.  Coropceanu, J.-L.  Brédas,  
M. F. Toney, B. Kippelen, J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018, 10, 11995.
[119]	 W. Du, D. Ohayon, C. Combe, L. Mottier, I. P. Maria, R. S. Ashraf, 
H.  Fiumelli, S.  Inal, I.  McCulloch, Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 
6164.
[120]	 J. F. Ponder, A. M. Österholm, J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater. 2017, 
29, 4385.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807033

