www.advmat.de
2209516  (1 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Perspective
In Liquido Computation with Electrochemical Transistors 
and Mixed Conductors for Intelligent Bioelectronics
Matteo Cucchi,* Daniela Parker, Eleni Stavrinidou, Paschalis Gkoupidenis, 
and Hans Kleemann
M. Cucchi
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Laboratory for Soft Bioelectronic Interfaces
Neuro-X Institute
Chemin des Mines 9, Geneva 1202, Switzerland
E-mail: matteo.cucchi@epfl.ch
M. Cucchi, H. Kleemann
Dresden Integrated Center for Applied Photophysics 
and Photonic Materials (IAPP)
Technische Universität Dresden
Helmholtzstr. 1, 01187 Dresden, Germany
D. Parker, E. Stavrinidou
Laboratory of Organic Electronics
Department of Science and Technology
Linköping University
Norrköping SE-60174, Sweden
P. Gkoupidenis
Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research
Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202209516.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202209516
1. Introduction
With the advent of solid-state transistors 
in the 1950s, digital computers took off. 
Since then, nanoelectronics and informa-
tion processing have become arguably the 
most successful technological endeavors 
ever pursued in human history. Their 
incredible advances stem from a sophis-
ticated and precise top-down integration 
that ranges from user-friendly interfaces 
down to nanometric transistors. Electro-
dynamics is exploited to achieve Boolean 
logic, allowing fast, precise, general-pur-
pose, and handy data processing. This par-
adigm is excellent for number crunching 
and logic operations. Furthermore, in 
the last two decades, the domain of com-
petence of digital electronics extended 
to tasks such as detection, recognition, 
and classification of patterns thanks to 
the advent of machine learning (ML) and 
artificial intelligence (AI). The success of 
digital architecture is further emphasized 
by the fact that integration, circuit design, 
and materials can be applied seamlessly to 
a wide range of applications, from smartphones and robotics 
to the automotive industry and space exploration. However, 
exploiting the conventional digital computation scheme for 
some specific applications is still challenging. For instance, 
coupling electronics to biological systems remains a thorny 
task.[1] Nonetheless, the field is very active, and a tremendous 
effort is being dedicated to this goal, pushed by the undisputed 
potential of integrating electronic circuits within the human 
body. Life-saving examples, such as the pacemaker, the insulin 
pump, and the cochlea implant, are already widely employed in 
clinical practice. At the same time, it is interesting to observe 
that current bioelectronics typically perform a “passive” func-
tion, eliciting signals in the presence (or absence) of a met con-
dition, for example, hyperglycemia or arrhythmic heartbeat, or 
recording biopotentials (Figure 1a). Instead, complex computa-
tion beyond the mere sensing is difficult and application-spe-
cific ICs are generally employed which must be encapsulated 
and placed nearby the sensing unit,[2,3] but the energy-intensive 
computation and pattern recognition that can be carried out 
with modern ML techniques cannot be yet implemented in 
implanted devices. The reasons are multiple and straightfor-
ward: first, the human body strongly hampers the design and 
fabrication of implantable electronics because of the strict limi-
tations in terms of heat dissipation, material stability, size, and 
Next-generation implantable computational devices require long-term-stable 
electronic components capable of operating in, and interacting with, electrolytic 
surroundings without being damaged. Organic electrochemical transistors 
(OECTs) emerged as fitting candidates. However, while single devices feature 
impressive figures of merit, integrated circuits (ICs) immersed in common 
electrolytes are hard to realize using electrochemical transistors, and there is no 
clear path forward for optimal top-down circuit design and high-density integra-
tion. The simple observation that two OECTs immersed in the same electrolytic 
medium will inevitably interact hampers their implementation in complex 
circuitry. The electrolyte’s ionic conductivity connects all the devices in the 
liquid, producing unwanted and often unforeseeable dynamics. Minimizing or 
harnessing this crosstalk has been the focus of very recent studies. Herein, the 
main challenges, trends, and opportunities for realizing OECT-based circuitry 
in a liquid environment that could circumnavigate the hard limits of engi-
neering and human physiology, are discussed. The most successful approaches 
in autonomous bioelectronics and information processing are analyzed. 
Elaborating on the strategies to circumvent and harness device crosstalk proves 
that platforms capable of complex computation and even machine learning (ML) 
can be realized in liquido using mixed ionic–electronic conductors (OMIECs).
﻿
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH 
GmbH. This is an open access article under the terms of the ­Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use,  
distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work 
is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (2 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
biological compatibility. Depending on the application and on 
the anatomical target, such limitations may range from mod-
erate to deal-breakers. Notable examples of electrical[4] and 
optical[5] stimulation on in vivo freely behaving animal models 
confirm both the cumbersome electronics needed for autono-
mous functioning of closed-loop bioelectronics and, at the 
same time, its huge medical potential for humans. Moreover, 
complex digital computation requires a significant energy 
supply, a problem typically worked-around (e.g., in smart-
phone) using cloud-computing. However, when dealing with 
sensitive biometric data, privacy issues immediately arise. 
On-chip (edge) computation represents a suitable alternative. 
Therefore, closed-loop systems and edge computation are to be 
preferred.[6] Because of these impediments, the employment of 
ML on in vivo models has only been exploited primarily offline, 
that is, after the patient’s analysis, using a conventional com-
puter, or limited to simple in vitro models.
Finally, electronics must interface the biological electrical 
circuitry: the two have completely different blueprints, with 
the latter relying on a complex system of chemical reactions 
and feedback loops, a system often referred to as “wetware.” 
The wetware is capable of processing chemo-electrical sig-
nals and respond in a way that counteract on malign patterns 
(Figure 1a). Our biochemical machinery is a source of inspira-
tion for better medical treatments that combines low energy 
needs and compatibility with our body. In this framework, the 
design of autonomous intelligent bioelectronics that can sense 
external stimuli, learn how to classify them, and act on them is 
highly sought-after (Figure 1a).
With these challenges in mind, new advances in the field of 
computer science, physics and engineering may help finding 
novel paradigms that allows energy-efficient and low-latency 
computation using systems that could better interface the 
biological environment. Recently, there has been increasing 
interest in what is often called “in materio” computation:[7] the 
idea is to exploit the dynamical properties of a material—or a 
generic physical system—to carry out information processing 
directly “on-chip” exploiting the response of such system to 
external stimuli.[8,9] The “analog” nature of the environment–
chip interaction ensures fast and energy-efficient signal com-
munication, without the need of a analog-to-digital conversion. 
Such a paradigm ensures low power consumption and minia-
turized chips that can be seamlessly implanted in living organ-
isms or exploited for in vivo analysis.
Embracing in  materio computing means supplanting the 
digital paradigm in favor of intrinsic physical properties. How 
these are exploited for a specific computational task may be 
material- or application-specific. Among these systems, mate-
rials that are able to carry out information processing in elec-
trolytic environments could be leveraged for “in liquido” com-
putation, that is, perform pattern recognition and inference in 
liquid environments.
In this scenario, polymers capable of transporting both ions 
and electrons, the so-called organic mixed ionic–electronic 
conductors (OMIECs) emerge as prime candidates. OMIECs 
are gated through the electrolyte, hence forming an electro-
chemical transistor (OECT). OECTs have recently been in the 
spotlight because of their peculiar physical and chemical prop-
erties, and they have been shown to be suitable for an impres-
sively wide plethora of applications, from conventional logic 
circuitry to brain-inspired and analog computation. Moreover, 
clever device design and fabrication allow their employment 
in different environments, from “dry” chips to in  vitro and 
in vivo[10–12] (Figure 1b).
Herein, we analyze the recent efforts that deal with the 
operation of OECT-based circuitry in liquid environments. We 
explain why digital electronics is hard to achieve even for sim-
plistic circuitry because of the difficult task of avoiding device-
to-device crosstalk: indeed, while in traditional circuits there is 
a defined and localized set of inputs and outputs per device, 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
Figure 1.  a) Sketch of the traditional working mechanisms of today’s medical implants compared to the ideal smart implants. b) Overview of the applications 
that OECTs have been demonstrated for, organized by the level of biological implementation and adaptive complexity. c) Comparison between gating MOSFETs 
in traditional electronics, where each channel is only influenced by its “parent” gate and OECTs, where each gate will affect every channel immersed in the 
same medium (square and circles indicate positive and negative charges, while pink and white denote the charges coming from one transistor or the other).
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (3 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
all electrochemical transistors communicate through the elec-
trolyte. The conductivity of the electrolyte is not high enough 
to cause a short-circuit, but mediates a strong capacitive cou-
pling between all devices (Figure  1c). Besides their operation 
in liquid environments, many OMIECs are biocompatible and 
provide a lower impedance than typical electrode coatings used 
in implantable devices. Very often, the IV characteristics of 
single electrochemical transistors are praised and envisioned 
to be of great utility for bioelectronic applications where neces-
sarily “homeostatic conditions” apply, that is, a common elec-
trolyte interacting with the devices, without foreseeing such 
crosstalk. Only very recently, researchers started to explore how 
to circumnavigate and even harness this crosstalk, with prom-
ising demonstrations for emerging intelligent bioelectronics. 
The results are encouraging although, so far, limited to proto-
typical demonstrations: a clear path forward for real-life and 
clinical applications is yet to be identified. Our analysis focuses 
on OECTs and OMIECs-based devices, but general principles 
may be applied to other technologies operating in global elec-
trolytic conditions, for example, ion-sensitive FETs, electrolyte-
gated FETs, and electrochemical transistors based on graphene 
and graphene oxide. As it turns out, if one wishes to have such 
circuitry in contact with the electrolytic environment, building 
logic gates and other basic components, cornerstone of the 
digital architecture, becomes extremely challenging. However, 
the digital paradigm can be left behind and the peculiar non-
linear properties of electrochemical transistors and the complex 
spatio-temporal coupling among devices can be leveraged for 
computation. In particular, the extended transients given by 
the different dynamics of ions and electrons can be exploited 
to operate unconventional computing schemes such as brain-
inspired and random neural networks and to realize implant-
able computational platforms capable of pattern recognition 
and inference in biological environments.
2. In Liquido Operation of OECTs
OMIECs are typically π-conjugated polymers with low oxida-
tion or reduction potential (see, e.g., review article by Paulsen 
et  al.[13]). The rise of organic mixed conductors for in  liquido 
electronics stems from a unique mechanism that couples 
the electronic and ionic currents flowing through the polymeric 
matrix. To illustrate this mechanism, as well as other examples 
throughout this Perspective, we use poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythio-
phene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as model, a p-type 
OMIEC that produces normally  on, depletion-mode OECTs. 
While historically PEDOT:PSS is by far the most employed 
OMIEC, recently, many materials have been shown to transport 
ions and electrons, including n-type polymers. For a detailed 
account of the physical and chemical properties of OMIECs and 
OECTs, the reader can refer to recent work such as refs. [13, 14].
In a simplified picture, in its pristine (dry) state (prior the 
electrolyte immersion), each negative PSS− moiety is bound to 
monomeric unit of PEDOT; the latter features a very low oxida-
tion potential, hence it undergoes oxidation, thereby generating 
a free hole (or more accurately a polaron) on the π-conjugated 
backbone. Given the good charge-carrier mobility granted by 
the π-conjugated backbone, as well as the weak electrostatic 
attraction exerted by the PSS−, the hole is free to drift under 
the influence of an external electric field. The electronic con-
ductivity of the film G is
µ
0
0
ρ
=
=
G
Wt
L e
G 	
(1)
where ρ0 is the concentration of the dopants PSS− which gen-
erate a free charge, and W, t, and L are the geometrical width, 
thickness and length of the film, respectively. In their dry state, 
OMIECs behave like resistors (Figure 2a). The interesting prop-
erties of OMIECs arise when they are immersed in an elec-
trolytic solution. It is important to notice that OMIECs swell 
significantly when placed in a suitable solvent and the polyelec-
trolyte (here PSS) mediates the ionic conduction through the 
polymeric matrix. This makes OMIECs ionic conductors,[15] 
therefore granting a unique and simultaneous electronic and 
ionic conduction that can be readily harnessed to interface 
biological and artificial systems. The ions coming from elec-
trolyte are able to counterbalance the charged moiety of the 
polyelectrolyte, therefore lowering the number of polarons and 
so the polymers conductance. As an example, for PEDOT:PSS 
immersed in an aqueous solution of NaCl, such process obeys 
the following chemical reaction
PEDOT :PSS
Na
e
PEDOT
Na :PSS
0

+
+
+
+
−
+
−
+
−	
(2)
As each cation penetrating the film (ionic current) directly 
affects the hole concentration (and therefore the electronic cur-
rent), the ionic current and the electronic current are intimately 
coupled in mixed conductors. The transformation of polarons 
(PEDOT+) in favor of reduced PEDOT0 can be regarded as 
an electrochemical dedoping. The process described in Equa-
tion (2) establishes an equilibrium in which a fraction φ of the 
total PEDOT+ amount (ρ0) is reduced to PEDOT0. Therefore, 
when immersed in an electrolytic solution, the charge-carrier 
concentration ρ of PEDOT differs from the dry state, and Equa-
tion (1) must be corrected as
µ
µ
1
1
0
0
ρ
ρ
φ
φ
(
)
(
)
=
=
−
=
−
G
Wt
L e
Wt
L e
G
	
(3)
Romele et al. showed that the salt concentration of the electro-
lyte does not affect the quantity φ, which is therefore a material-
specific property that can be explained in terms of entropy of 
mixing.[14,16] The existence of this equilibrium has profound 
consequences on the device physics inasmuch the non-gated 
channel is in an intermediate state between the fully on and 
fully off state, depending on the value of φ. Therefore, the gate 
perturbs this equilibrium both with a positive and negative bias, 
which makes the OMIEC responsive to a larger plethora of sig-
nals rather than the ones of one polarity only. When the film 
interacts with the electrolyte its electrical properties change and 
the OMIEC typically behaves like a resistor (with a resistance 
different from the “dry” scenario, Figure 2b).
The ease with which such polymers reversibly undergo 
reduction and oxidation grants them exceptional properties 
as solid/liquid electrical interfaces, especially considering 
the minimal contact resistance between OMIECs and noble 
metals. Therefore, by generating and annihilating free charges, 
OMIECs are capable of transducing efficiently electronic 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (4 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
currents into ionic currents, a sought-after feature for bioel-
ectronic biotic/abiotic interfaces. This mechanism stands out 
when compared to typical low-impedance yet unstable and 
sometimes toxic non-polarizable electrodes (e.g., Ag/AgCl), as 
well as to durable yet highly resistive polarizable electrodes (Pt, 
Au, etc.) (Figure 2c).
The good ion–electron coupling can be better leveraged by 
employing a third electrode in order to “gate” an OMIEC thin 
film (channel) as displayed in Figure  2d, thus forming an 
organic electrochemical transistor. In this way, the passive dif-
fusive process of the ions penetrating the film can be actively 
controlled and steered from equilibrium by applying a poten-
tial difference between the gate electrode and the channel. The 
reader can refer to detailed articles on OECTs operation and 
characterization.[16,17]
In the following, we simplify the treatment and mathemat-
ical modeling of OECTs using the traditional description of 
OECTs as thin-film transistors, an approach that despite strong 
assumptions turns out to approximate well the linear behavior 
of such devices.[18] Within this Bernards model, the drain cur-
rent Id varies in presence of a potential difference between 
source and gate Vg and between source and drain Vd as
1
2
d
0
g
d
p
d
=
−
−








I
G
V
V
V
V 	
(4)
where Vp is the pinch-off voltage and it is related to the film’s 
volumetric capacitance C*, according to Vp = eρ0/C*.
Herein, Equation (4) is used to model OECTs, and it is then 
extended in Section  2.3 to multi-device operation to model 
device-to-device coupling.
Differently from the two-electrode case, in an OECT, the elec-
trolyte concentration affects the transfer characteristics of the 
transistor, due to the voltage drop across the gate–electrolyte–
channel subcircuit, which typically follows a Nernstian depend-
ence. The voltage drop at the gate–electrolyte interface is fur-
ther influenced by the gate’s material and size, an effect that 
has been thoroughly exploited to demonstrate OECTs as 
ion sensors.[19,20] On this basis, only a fraction of the applied 
gate voltage is “felt” by the channel. Such fraction is often 
referred to as “gate coupling” and its maximization is key for 
high-performance OECTs. Moreover, the gate’s electrode can 
be chosen to trigger Faradaic reactions that allow sensing of 
biologically  relevant neutral chemicals, such as glucose and 
hydrogen peroxide.[21]
The ionic circuit is generally modeled with a Randles cell for 
the gate–electrolyte interface, with a resistor for the bulk electro-
lyte (cf. Figure 2c), and another Randles cell for the electrolyte–
channel interface. Typically, at low frequencies, the interfaces 
dominate the impedance of the ionic circuit. OECTs can attain 
impressive transistor performances: they can be switched off 
with less than 1 V, have high transconductance, and feature 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
Figure 2.  Sketch of the basic OMIECs-based device architectures used throughout this work to describe the electrical properties of single and multi-
device systems and crosstalk: a) a single OMIEC channel in the dry state behaves as a resistor, b) a single OMIEC channel in electrolyte also behaves 
like a resistor, c) an OMIEC/electrolyte interface (described by a Randles circuit), d) an OECT, e) an OECT with two gates, f) two channels without 
“proper” gate, and g) two neighboring OECTs.
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (5 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
a sub-threshold slope that approaches the thermodynamic 
limit.[22–25] Note that these characteristics can be leveraged for 
autonomous and self-powered electronics, key for battery-free 
implantable electronics. Additionally, by engineering a vertical 
channel, impressive current densities have been shown,[26] 
and, by minimizing the distance between channel and gate, 
the response time can be as low as 31 µs.[27] Moreover, the 
basic architecture of the OECT can be extended and modified 
in order to have different devices such as diodes, memristors, 
batteries, etc.[28] A single OECT-based ion sensor can easily be 
employed for in vivo or in vitro applications, where the gate and 
channel are exposed to the liquid medium and are connected 
to an encapsulated circuit based on traditional electronics. The 
same idea can be transferred to other applications, such as the 
recording of biopotentials.[11]
2.1. Device-to-Device Crosstalk
While sensing or stimulation can be carried out using indi-
vidual devices or interfaces, many other applications, such as 
digital computation, require a more complex circuitry based 
on multiple components. Already simple logic gates need a 
number of transistors. The integration of multiple OECTs 
in the same electrolytic medium, where each component is 
in electrical contact due to its ionic conductivity, is very chal-
lenging.[29] This is an odd scenario when compared to tradi-
tional circuit design based on solid-state components such 
as metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOS-
FETs), where each device is (ideally) uncoupled and inde-
pendent. Occasionally, demonstrations of OECT circuitry are 
carried out by casting individual drops of electrolyte in such 
a way that each channel is in contact only with its “parent” 
gate. Such an approach cannot be imagined to be translated 
into a commercial product nor real-life applications. More-
over, experiments like these can result in poor consistency 
due to the quick evaporation rate of small water drops, and 
consequential difficulty in maintaining a constant electrolyte 
concentration. All these problems can be circumnavigated 
at once by employing solid and patternable electrolytes, ion-
conductive gels, or crosslinked molten salts. The use of pat-
ternable ion-conductors allowed for high-performance OECTs 
and power-efficient ICs.[25,30] Solid OECTs have been success-
fully demonstrated for a variety of applications and allowed the 
peculiar properties of the OMIECs and OECTs to be leveraged 
for traditional circuitry. However, while OECTs based on solid-
state electrolytes are being explored as a good alternative to 
other solid-state circuit elements, electrochemical transistors 
operated in liquid electrolytes are arguably the best example 
of circuit elements that can be employed in a biological wet 
environment for computing, as they combine very large capac-
itance, good electronic-to-ionic transduction, stability in physi-
ological conditions, and biocompatibility. Under this “global 
condition,” individual gating is difficult to achieve and signifi-
cant crosstalk between devices is to be expected. Crosstalk is 
a well-known effect present in any IC under different forms 
and names (near-field coupling, capacitive coupling, leakage 
currents, inductive coupling, common-impedance coupling, 
etc.). Crosstalk typically carries a negative connotation as it 
refers to a mechanism where signals influence each other in 
undesired ways.[31] Clearly, capacitive and inductive effects are 
used in many applications, for example, wireless communi-
cations, but typically the “action at distance” occurs between 
two well-defined components rather than with the whole cir-
cuit indiscriminately, often referred to as parasitic currents. 
Many parameters affect the magnitude of the crosstalk, from 
the amplitude and frequency of the signals to the material and 
geometry of the circuit. Therefore, careful circuit design must 
foresee and address such an effect. In OECT circuitry designed 
to work in electrolytic environments, crosstalk cannot be 
avoided even in simple designs. This coupling is difficult to 
model due to the nonlinear electrical characteristics of OECTs 
and because of the voltage and concentration-dependence 
of the electrical property of the liquid. Therefore, in order 
to employ multiple OECTs and OECT-based devices in a cir-
cuit, such dynamics must be understood and harnessed. Two 
regimes can be distinguished, static and dynamic, to analyze 
the coupling between devices, based on the timescale the act 
on. The characteristic charging time of a channel τ, that is, the 
time needed to switch from the on to the off state and vice-
versa is proportional to the product of the capacitance of the 
channel (hence its volume), and the resistance of the gating 
medium.[32] It is important to note that, although the circuit is 
often modeled with linear components (resistors and capaci-
tors), electrolyte and electrolyte/solid interfaces are generally 
nonlinear and the linear approximations may break down 
close to current saturation state both in the on- and off-state. 
If the voltages applied to the devices are time-dependent and 
vary on a time scale much longer than τ, a static regime can 
be assumed.
2.2. Static Regime
In this case, Equation (4) is a good approximation, although the 
contributions of all the voltages applied in the global environ-
ments must be summed up.
For example, the current flowing in a channel under the 
influence of two (identical, i.e., same size) gates, as sketched in 
Figure 2e is
1
2
d
0
g,1
g,2
d
p
d
=
−
+
−








I
G
V
V
V
V
V 	
(5)
Importantly, in the static regime, the distance between channel 
and gate does not matter as long as the electrolyte provides 
good ionic conduction. Therefore, a channel will be switched 
on and off almost identically by any gate immersed in solu-
tion.[33] Equation (5) breaks down if the gates are not identical. 
Different size brings about different capacitance which must be 
summed in parallel. Moreover, by engineering the gate material 
or its surface functionalization, the channel may respond dif-
ferently depending on the electrolyte composition. Such a tech-
nique can be used, for example, to build ion-specific sensors. 
Another simple case occurs when two identical channels are 
biased with Vd,1 and Vd,2 (Figure 2f), each one gating the other, 
although the gating effect is weaker due to its space dependency 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (6 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
over the channel.[34] The currents Id,1 and Id,2 flowing through 
the two channels obey
1
2
d,1
0
d,2
d,1
p
d,1
=
−
−




I
G
V
V
V
V
	
(6)
and, symmetrically
1
2
.
d,2
0
d,1
d,2
p
d,2
I
G
V
V
V
V
=
−
−




	
(7)
Putting together Equations  (4)–(6), the current flowing in the 
channel in a configurations such as the one in Figure 2g is
1
2
2
.
d,1
0
g,1
g,2
d,2
d,1
p
d,1
=
−
+
+
−








I
G
V
V
V
V
V
V
	
(8)
The unwanted crosstalk influences heavily the current–
voltage characteristics of each channel, hampering the use of 
such devices for purposes where static behavior is expected, 
such as digital electronics. Only simplistic (one-input-one-
output) circuit components can be built and be functional 
under such conditions, for example complementary inverters 
and sensors.[29] Logic gates that require two inputs, funda-
mental in digital electronics, are already challenging due to 
the fact that both gates affect all the channels indiscriminately, 
strongly limiting the usefulness of OECTs for logic in liquido. 
These obstacles, however, can be worked-around operating in 
the dynamic regime.
2.3. Dynamic Regime
When time-dependent voltages are applied and varying on a 
time scale comparable to, or lower than τ (typically ranging in 
tens of millisecond), the ionic (dis)charging time must be taken 
into account (assuming that the response of the electronic 
circuit of the OECT is orders of magnitude faster than the ionic 
circuit). By modelling the ionic circuit with a resistor (the elec-
trolyte) in series with a capacitor (the channel), for a pulsed 
gate voltage of amplitude Vg starting at time t = 0, the current in 
the channel obeys
( )
1
2
1
exp
d
0
g
d
p
d
τ
=
−
−








−
−
















I t
G
V
V
V
t
V 	
(9)
for a normally-on OECT.[18] Therefore, Id(t) depends on the 
distance between circuit components and adds a degree of 
freedom with respect to Equations (5)–(7). Again, this is a linear  
approximation of an otherwise nonlinear element. Deeper anal-
ysis of the transient time of OECTs can be found in refs. [35,36]. 
The dynamic regime offers more freedom and opportuni-
ties for integration of multiple devices within the same elec-
trolyte. For example, while in a simple two-gate-two-channel 
configuration as in Figure 2g, finding the combination of gate  
voltages that fix the current of the channels to two specific 
values can be impossible due to the crosstalk, the situation is 
different if pulses are applied. The optimization of the pulse 
duration and amplitude in relation to the distance between 
each gate–channel pair allows the current of the channels to 
be set to the desired values. Naturally, it will be a time-varying 
current swinging between two levels due to the time-dependent 
nature of the gate signals. Therefore one should refer to their 
average current or a temporal integration. This is a necessary 
step toward brain-inspired and physical computation. This 
could be harnessed in a design in which pulsed gate signals are 
used to modulate the current in neighboring channels without 
affecting farther channels. An example is reported in Figure 3, 
where it is displayed how the resistance of three channels is 
affected by individual gates, and how their effect can be super-
imposed to modulate each channel’s (average) conductance.
The nonlinear coupling of all the potentials applied within 
the electrolyte offers new routes to explore different criteria 
for circuit design. The idea of using the transient time for 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
Figure 3.  Example of a two-gate-three-channel configuration. a) Sketch of the physical circuit with PEDOT:PSS channels of 100 × 200 µm biased at Vd = 
500 mV and gates of 500 × 500 µm in water:NaCl 100 mm. The color code of each component is maintained in the plots below for data visualization. 
b–d) Drain currents of the three channels under the effect of one gate pulsing (b,c) and with both gates pulsing simultaneously (d).
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (7 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
electronics and computation goes hand-in-hand with recent 
trends in the development of new computational paradigms 
that exploit dynamical systems and transient effects. More-
over, biologically  inspired applications, such as spiking neu-
rons and growing networks, are more easy to deploy using 
dynamic effects.
This approach is in stark contrast with traditional digital 
electronics (where the transients are negligible and crosstalks 
are minimized) and it is often referred to as “in materio com-
puting.” Hence, in analogy with this term, in  materio com-
puting in wet environments is named “in liquido computing.”
2.4. Collective Behavior: Beyond Digital
While circuit elements are generally designed to respond to a 
defined set of inputs, which are fed by means of such metallic 
connections, biological “electrical” circuitry, and wetware 
evolved to work very differently: not only local inputs drive the 
operation of cells, nerves and synapses, but a global input too 
(temperature, viscosity, chemical composition, etc.) affects their 
response and behavior. At the same time, the environment has 
a direct effect on the network, acting on it to maintain it stable 
and avoid drifting in operation ranges too close to hyperactivity 
or quiescence.[37]
While the wetware is a completely different paradigm com-
pared to our software/hardware design, plenty of examples in 
nature show how even simple organisms can carry out complex 
tasks (communication, navigation, playing, fighting, recogni-
tion) with much smaller energy requirements than our best 
robotic systems. The abovementioned influence on a number 
of global and local parameters is mediated by the chemical 
composition of the environment and on the activity of neigh-
boring “circuit elements” (as it is the case for close neurons 
firing). The modification of these global parameters, referred 
to as homeostatic environment, allows for a prompt and col-
lective change of the behavior of the whole system. Moreover, 
it is used to affect the magnitude of the crosstalk between near 
yet unconnected neurons, and maintains the activity of the net-
work at the optimal level of excitability without drifting into a 
range of hyperactivity or quiescence.[37] These connections, 
which are not physically built, rather mediated by the environ-
ment, can be regarded as soft connections, a term first coined 
in ref. [38]. Although the manipulation of the soft connections 
is a powerful tool to influence the behavior of a circuit without 
the need of constant formation and disruption of physical 
connections, the nervous system is also capable of physical 
rewiring: neurons can grow dendrites and synapses, they can 
change size and even die in order to establish the optimal con-
nectivity within the network. These are physical (or hard) con-
nections, and they are a good analogy to the metallic tracks 
in traditional circuits (of course, metallic lines do not show 
synaptic plasticity). A sketch of soft and hard connections is 
depicted in Figure 4.
With this scenario in mind, whereby both soft and hard con-
nections play a key role, OMIECs come in extremely handy. 
First, the OMIEC can be used as metallic track for the physical 
connections. Second, OECTs can be employed as active ele-
ments (transistors, artificial synapses, spiking neurons, sen-
sors) whose response will depend necessarily both on the local 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
Figure 4.  a) Top-view on an example circuit made of OMIEC-based channels and gates with highlighted hard connections (the physical organic 
film bridging metal tracks) and soft connections (all the voltage-mediated interactions between each component). b) A single gate exerts 
a global input on a multitude of channels that, however, interact with each other. In the inset, a pair of neurons interact with global and local 
inputs. b) Adapted under the terms of the CC-BY Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0).[38] Copyright 2017, The Authors, published by Springer Nature.
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (8 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
input and on the global inputs (gating). Last, OMIECs can be 
grown in the same electrolytic environment where (and under 
similar condition at which) they operate. These observations 
naturally point toward the realization of evolvable and reconfig-
urable electronics, a topic that we address in Section 3.
In principle, simple circuitry could operate correctly even in 
global connectivity by clever design of the components and of 
the pulse scheme used to drive them. The idea of employing 
global connectivity in OECTs was pioneered by Gkoupidenis 
et al., both in many-gate–single-channel[39,40] and in single-gate–
many-channel architectures.[38] This early work stems from the 
necessity of finding a spatio-temporal correlation between input 
and output signals in a global environment (homeostatic condi-
tions) to design brain-inspired electronics.[41] For instance, ori-
entation selectivity, a key mechanism in the lower level of the 
visual system (i.e., the visual cortex), can be reproduced with 
a single-channel OECT addressed with a grid of gates. More-
over, by forcing global electrochemical oscillations in an array 
of such devices, the activity of those devices can be synchro-
nized.[42] Phase-dependent coupling between the global signal 
the local device activity is induced by such global oscillations. 
This coupling induces a functional type of connectivity between 
neuromorphic devices in analogy with the brain oscillations 
(also known as brain waves) that synchronize distant neural 
populations. This is in strong analogy with the brain, where 
despite the significant noise and stochastic neurons spiking, 
the neural networks have robust firing properties observable in 
stable and global oscillation patterns.
In a similar way, coincidence detection, a mechanism impor-
tant for the auditory system, but also similar to the spatio-
temporal integration of incoming inputs of the neuron soma, 
can be implemented with OECT arrays.[38] Building upon these 
concepts, multi-gate arrays can be employed for ion-mediated 
multiplexing[43] and spatio-temporal input correlation.[44] In this 
configuration, the spatio-temporal response of multi-gate arrays 
can be used for blind local ionic multiplexing. Blind means 
that there is no need for address assignment at the inputs (in 
contrast to classic multiplexing), and local means that mul-
tiplexing is a result of the spatio-temporal properties of the 
device without depending on classic peripheral circuitry. The 
abovementioned examples show the flexibility and complexity 
in ionic communication that can be achieved with the incor-
poration of global electrolytes in neuromorphic architectures. 
These works exploits the transient time originating from the 
(dis)charging of an OECT channel for spatio-temporal discrimi-
nation. In order to implement such architectures into useful 
electronics, the digital I/O paradigm must be replaced with a 
time-continuous spike-like implementation, similar to how 
neurons “decide” whether to fire or not.
3. Evolvable, Self-Organized, and Random 
Networks
Utilizing new materials and physical systems to build implants 
may also be accompanied by unconventional fabrication 
and deployment techniques that differ from the traditional 
micro-  and nanofabrication of ICs. Achieving good, long-
lasting, coupling between the fabricated system and the targeted 
tissue is challenging and at the same time a fundamental step 
to overcome to achieve intimate interface. As introduced in 
Section  2.4, OMIECs have the peculiarity that the electrolytic 
environment can be both a catalyst for their polymerization 
and the medium for their operation as transistors. Therefore, 
a circuit of OMIECs can be modified during operation allowing 
for a reconfiguration and organization of the circuitry. If the 
electrical pathways evolve under specific circumstances occur-
ring during their operation, the final circuit will shape itself in 
a way that depends on the history of its operation. In an analo-
gous way, the nervous system restlessly rewires its neuronal cir-
cuitry based on the body’s activity and its internal and external 
stimuli. As such, evolvable OECTs and OMIECs have the poten-
tial to produce brain-inspired circuitry.
Gerasimov et al. took the first prototypical steps toward unsu-
pervised learning and reconfigurable circuitry using OECTs by 
demonstrating in operando oxidative polymerization of OMIECs 
and so producing evolvable organic electrochemical transis-
tors.[45] They further coupled the trigger of the growth with other 
physical, environmental, and analog processes within the circuit 
itself.[46] The technique involves the dissolution in the electrolyte 
of the precursor monomer of the OMIEC and an ion capable of 
doping it. If a potential larger than the oxidation potential of the 
monomer is applied, the electropolymerization starts. Electropo-
lymerization is typically obtained by applying a constant voltage 
or current against a counter electrode. In a similar fashion, an 
AC signal can be employed.[47,48] The dendritic and filament-like 
morphology resulting from the AC electropolymerization, rather 
than closed-films as in the DC case, allows for guided and direc-
tional connection growth. Such a method can be leveraged for 
the production of blueprint-less networks for in vitro and in vivo 
sensing platforms and (neural) networks as it will be discussed in 
Section 4.[34] The electropolymerization process can be controlled 
only by a certain extent leading to poor device homogeneity. 
Therefore, these devices are more suitable for computational 
approaches where randomness and complexity are desirable 
rather than, for instance, crossbars for matrix-vector multiplica-
tions.[49,50] The great effort devoted to develop and optimize the 
growth of evolvable OECTs did not solve a key issue: a control-
lable “depolymerization” process is still missing. A depression 
mechanism to decrease the weight of connections is mandatory 
for reliable ANN training. Two ways to decrease a connection’s 
conductivity are available: electrochemical dedoping (in form 
of reduction or overoxidation) using an external potential, or 
waiting for its structural degradation. The former introduces the 
problem of crosstalk (every device in the electrolyte undergoes 
depression), hence lowering the accuracy of the whole network. 
The latter, instead, is a passive, slow and stochastic process. The 
structural degradation was shown to emulate long-term depres-
sion, a process similar to memory-erasing in the brain, whose 
rate can be modulated by changing the polymerization param-
eters and branching degree.[47] However, so far, no stability test 
in vivo has been performed. In general, state-of-the-art bioelec-
tronics do not yet rely on circuitry with variable and evolvable 
electronic properties but rather on fixed long-term stable sys-
tems to avoid dealing with unwanted variability.
The potential of evolvable and electropolymerized organic 
conductive films for bioelectronics is further exemplified 
by examples of in  vivo formation of the OMIECs.[51,52] In 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (9 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
one example, the active site of an implanted neural probe is 
formed in  situ via electropolymerization of dispersed EDOT 
monomers, thereby decreasing the interfacial impedance and 
improving the signal to noise ratio of the recordings. Moreover, 
Koizumi et al. demonstrated that the growth can be triggered 
“wirelessly” employing an external electrical field.[53]
These techniques may allow for an accurate growth of these 
polymers in vivo to target specific tissues or cells, however the 
driving current of the polymerization may be detrimental. An 
alternative to this issue comes from the use of biological sub-
strates as a scaffold and trigger for the polymerization of OMIECs, 
opening the doorway to interfacing bioelectronics to the biocata-
lytic machinery of biological organism, and intimate coupling to 
biological wetware. In this framework, EDOT–thiophene-based 
derivatives were synthesized as water-soluble oligomers with the 
aim of developing self-doped OMIECs suitable for biofabrica-
tion.[54] A recent example involves the invertebrate hydra as an 
animal model to polymerize 4-(2-(2,5-bis(2,3-dihydrothieno[3,4-b] 
[1,4]dioxin-5-yl)thiophen-3-yl)ethoxy)butane-1-sulfonate (ETE-S), 
as shown in Figure 5a. The conducting polymer was localized in 
tissues that expressed peroxidase activity, but it was also found 
in the adhesive substance secreted by the animal that it used to 
attach on surfaces while underwater[55] (Figure 5b).
The approach for self-organization and polymerization of 
oligomers triggered by the biochemical environments was first 
demonstrated in plants.[56] ETE-S polymerized in the vascular 
tissue of rose cuttings without any physical or chemical stimuli 
forming conducting wires with conductivity of 10 S cm−1 and 
specific capacitance of 20 F g−1. In a later work it was demon-
strated that peroxidase enzymes, present in the plant cell wall 
were responsible for the polymerization reaction (Figure 5a)[57] 
while the plant tissue is acting as a template for the polymer 
that organizes in a favorable manner with pronounced π–π 
stacking.[58] When intact plants were “watered” with ETE-S 
solution, an integrated conducting root network was formed 
and, not only it did not hamper the plant development, but it led 
to the growth of a more complex root system, as the plant was 
adapting to the new hybrid state (Figure 5c). As for the roots 
conductivity, it remained stable for over 4 weeks even though 
the roots kept growing showcasing the effective functionaliza-
tion. These works represent examples of harnessing the bio-
catalytic machinery of living organisms for the fabrication and 
seamless integration of electroactive interfaces in vivo. Both in 
plants and in hydra animal model the integrated OMIEC is bio-
compatible without any signs of toxicity or negatively impacting 
the biological function. In plants, the tissue integrated OMIECs 
in combination with the natural electrolytic environment were 
used to demonstrate the possibility of utilizing the in  vivo 
organized OMIECs in devices.[59] Such components can be 
used to communicate and better leverage the intrinsic com-
putational capabilities of plant’s physiological dynamics.[60] 
For example, in a hydra model, the ETE-S was polymerizing 
during the foot regeneration at the amputation site forming a 
conducting layer simultaneously with the newly forming tissue. 
Although these devices required addressing with external elec-
trodes and did not have a record performance, they open the 
pathway for a new paradigm on how technological components 
are integrated in living tissues. Further understanding of how 
to utilize the complex biochemical environment of living organ-
isms, not only for organizing functional components, but also 
to enable bidirectional communication between the two may 
result in autonomous systems that self-regulate the biotic and 
abiotic interaction and evolve over time.
4. Computation and Machine Learning using 
Electrochemical Networks
Looking at a biological neural network, it is not trivial nor easy 
to state which is the fundamental unit carrying and processing 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
Figure 5.  a) ETE-S polymerizes in-vivo due to endogenous peroxidase enzymes and hydrogen peroxide. b) Formation of OMIEC in the basal disc 
area of hydra polyps treated with ETE-S after 24 and 168 h of incubation. Scale bars: 500 µm (upper panel), 50 µm (lower panel). c) Bean plants roots 
functionalized with ETE-S resulting in a OMIEC coating on the roots epidermis, upper: plane view (scale bar: 500 µm), middle: longitudinal cross 
sections (scale bar: 100 µm), and lower: transversal cross sections (scale bar: 100 µm). a) Reproduced with permission.[57] Copyright 2020, Royal Society 
of Chemistry. b) Reproduced with permission.[55] Copyright 2022, published by Elsevier on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. c) Reproduced with 
permission.[58] Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (10 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
information. The most numerous one in the biological, as well 
as in artificial neural networks is the synapse. Artificial syn-
apses are devices whose resistance can be tuned at wish. These 
must then be implemented in large networks and be used in 
computational tasks. While a large pool of devices for electro-
lyte-compatible artificial synapses has been demonstrated, only 
a handful of examples pointed toward the implementation at 
the network level,[50,61] and rarely in liquid environment. Akai-
Kasaya et al.[62] employed the electropolymerization technique 
mentioned in Section  3 to grow conductive fibers made of 
PEDOT:PSS between gold electrodes. The directionality of 
the reaction can be controlled through the amplitude and fre-
quency of the triggering AC field and ensures good control 
over the process. They demonstrated feed-forward neural net-
works where the weight of each connection is controlled by the 
reaction time.
Precise synaptic connectivity (i.e., fine-tuning of the edges) 
is a prerequisite for a functional neural circuit, be it a biolog-
ical, physical, or algorithm-based. However, brain rewiring is 
a developmental growth mechanism that is not only character-
ized by accuracy, but also fault-tolerance, flexibility, and robust-
ness. Similar to other growth processes, cellular interactions are 
restricted in space and time, especially considering a synaptic 
density in humans of 1  ×  109 synapses mm−3.[63] As a result, 
noise and crosstalk are not negligible in neuronal firing and are 
an important source of stochasticity, and when subjected to the 
same inputs, neurons and neural networks can respond in dif-
ferent ways. These observations raised the doubt: can a network 
incapable of tuning precisely each of its units be functional? 
Such a question can be brought to its extreme: can a completely 
untrained network still perform useful computation?
The quest intrigued computer scientists and the first models 
of computation performed by random and fixed networks were 
already proposed in the 80’s. More recently, the method was 
introduced in a general ML framework: by coupling a random, 
fixed, untrained network with a perceptron-like output layer 
(which is the only part of the network trained via linear regres-
sion), the method came to be known as reservoir computing 
(RC).[64,65] RC networks can be used effectively for information 
processing while unloading the burden of the time- and energy-
consuming phase training (as well as an excellent device yield) of 
the network that, by definition, is random and does not need any 
design blueprint nor adjustment of its weights. By driving input 
signals into a random, large, fixed recurrent neural network, and 
thereby inducing in each neuron within this “reservoir” a non-
linear response, one can obtained a desired output signal by a 
trainable linear combination of all of these output signals.[8,9] 
The random network/layers mediate a nonlinear mapping of 
the input layer onto the higher-dimensional space of the output 
layer. This is the so-called kernel method. How RC compares to 
traditional ML is outside the scope of this work, but it undoubt-
edly stands out as a promising contender for physical neural 
networks. This method can leverage the countless nonlinear 
properties that can be found in material systems, as well as cir-
cumnavigate the necessity of precise training and low device-to-
device variability. Indeed, RC has been demonstrated on a widely 
diverse plethora of systems, from traditional silicon-based tran-
sistors to more exotic examples employing nonlinear photonic or 
magnetic effects.[8,9] The virtually infinite combination of mate-
rials and systems suitable for RC massively shrinks down when 
selecting those that fulfill the stringent requirements of implant-
able electronics, from the mechanical to the electrical standpoint, 
as well as in terms of biocompatibility and softness. At the same 
time, a large pool of materials could be used in electrolytes, for 
example porous graphene,[66] metals,[67] or carbon nanotubes,[68] 
but functional networks were only demonstrated in dry condi-
tions and therefore for different applications. A natural approach 
is to exploit chemical reservoirs, that is, reservoirs based on the 
nonlinear dynamics arising from chemical reactions: they can be 
leveraged to produce computational systems for specific applica-
tions in liquid environments and at the same time be directly 
interfaced with the biochemical machinery of our body. As chem-
ical dynamics are limited in speed by the reaction and diffusion 
rates, chemical reservoirs do not stand out for speed and are not 
suitable for applications where low-latency is required. However, 
when dealing with biological systems, the speed becomes sec-
ondary and other properties, such as cytocompatibility, long-term 
stability, and interaction with the environments are prioritized. 
Very recently, examples of chemical RC that capitalized on redox 
reactions have been proposed, showing excellent performance 
and great potential for biosensing as well as for ML in liquido. 
For examples, Kan et  al. exploited the nonlinear spatial and 
temporal dynamics of an electrolytic solution containing poly-
oxometalate.[69] Such a compound can undergo multiple oxida-
tion and reduction states, producing Faradaic reactions with the 
metallic electrode upon the application of a voltage. The authors 
showed that an electrolytic solution alone can be used a random 
network for periodic time-series predictions. The usefulness of 
the electrolyte and electrochemical reactions can be better lever-
aged in RC if the ionic dynamics are converted into electronic 
signals using OMIECs and OECTs. A first proof-of-concept dem-
onstration was devised by Pecqueur et al.,[70] who used a gate as 
“source” time-dependent signal and an array of 16 OECT chan-
nels continuously biased. The gate signal modulates the current 
in the channels. Without any device-to-device variability, each 
channel should respond identically to the gate signals. However, 
intrinsic imperfections in the morphology of the polymeric mate-
rials create inherent variability. Key in this work is the demon-
stration that: 1) device-to-device variability, a ubiquitous factor 
in organic electronics can be harnessed as a feature, and that 
2) ionic-to-electronic transduction using OECTs can be used 
for machine learning. They showed that such a system can be 
used to distinguish different time-dependent signals, like square 
waves from triangular waves. In this work, the proposed reser-
voir is still “consciously designed” and requires precise microfab-
rication of the transistor channels.
Cucchi et  al. built upon this idea and produced reservoirs 
made of electropolymerized OECTs. The electropolymerization 
offers several advantages such as inexpensive lithography-free 
fabrication as well as dendritic topology.[34] The latter emerges 
as an important feature when several fibers are operated in 
global gate conditions. The voltage drops along a fiber between 
the two metal connections, making up for a hard connection, 
or, as named in the article, an excitatory connection. However, 
if a fiber branches out and terminates in the electrolyte, its 
potential will be constant as its resistance is much lower than 
the one of the electrolyte, constituting an inhibitory (soft) con-
nection. The negligible voltage drop along inhibitory fibers 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (11 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
enhances the gating strength of such branches, whose effect on 
neighboring and farther fibers builds up during the charging 
transient time. This grants rich nonlinear behaviors[71] as 
shown in Figure 6. Nonlinear, synchronized and even chaotic 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
Figure 6.  Behavior of electrochemical networks. a) Input signals injected in a PEDOT-based electrochemical network and its Fourier transform. b) A net-
work based on ionic currents i.e. no hard connections between input and output layers results in poor nonlinearity as shown by the output curves in time 
and frequency domains. c) A balance between soft and hard connections is ideal for information processing and d) a fully connected network behaves 
mostly linearly. a–d) Adapted with permission.[34] Copyright 2021, The Authors, published by American Association for the Advancement of Science. From 
ref. [34]. © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/4.0/. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. e) Employing a delayed-feedback loop in an electrochemical network can transform a nonlinear network 
into a chaotic one, hence lending higher complexity to the physical system (where λ is an amplification factor). f) The input voltage is plotted vs the output 
voltage for OECTs with different transconductance (gm), and g) its relative bifurcation plot. e–g) Adapted under the terms of the CC-BY Creative Com-
mons Attribution 4.0 International license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0).[71] Copyright 2021, The Authors, published by Wiley-VCH.
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (12 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
patterns arise as a consequence of synergistic interactions 
between each fiber segments: each fiber, driven by local inputs, 
modifies the behavior of others operating in the same environ-
ment. At the same time, its action is modified by the others. 
The consequence of this mutual modification, operating over 
time, is the emergence of a stable pattern. As it often happens 
in emergent systems, the precise design of its components 
is irrelevant for the final appearance of complexity, but a few 
requirements for integration must be obeyed. Figure  6 high-
lights the importance of a balance between hard and soft con-
nections: Figure 6a shows the poor nonlinear transfer response 
of a networks that are completely formed by fibers connecting 
the input to the output layer (totality of excitatory fibers), as well 
as formed by fibers that terminate within the solution (totality 
of inhibitory fibers). A balance between the two is needed for a 
good nonlinear transformation, although a quantitative analysis 
is missing. Clever design (although still inherently random or 
semi-random) of the networks allows for remarkable results in 
machine learning tasks, such as flower recognition using the 
iris dataset. The networks worked much better using time-var-
ying signals, highlighting the usefulness of the ionic dynamics 
and the nonlinear charging transient of the fibers. When a 
delay-line is added to the network, therefore implementing a 
single-node reservoir computing architecture, the nonlineari-
ties of the system are extremized into a chaotic behavior[71] as 
shown in Figures 6d–f. This way, complex tasks such as time-
series predictions and heartbeat recognition can be carried out 
with excellent accuracy, 96% and 88%, respectively.[34] Along 
these lines, Usami et al. covered a set of circular electrodes with 
a film of sulfonated polyaniline.[72] The film was then immersed 
in an electrolytic solution. This way, no patterning at all is 
needed, and the nonlinear dynamics are mediated by the non-
homogeneous film as well as by the spatial distribution of the 
injected and recorded signals. Such a method was successfully 
employed for time-dependent classification such as spoken 
digits with an accuracy of 60%. The accuracy of such examples 
is typically lower than state-of-the-art RC and other machine 
learning techniques (which approach 100%). It is clear, how-
ever, that such comparison must be made while keeping in 
mind the fabrication and material limitations for the implant-
able hardware. At the same time, there is much room and need 
for improvement in order to achieve performances similar to 
ML standards. Nevertheless, these approaches demonstrate that 
complex computation can be attained in liquido at low energy 
cost exploiting the dynamical properties of a given material 
system. The physical processes at their core are independent 
of the random, semirandom, or patterned nature of the net-
work. These networks can be a useful extension of the toolbox 
of emergent multimodal implantable electronics[73] thanks to 
the inherent low power consumption due to the analog signal 
processing, the biocompatibility of OMIECs, and the fact that 
traditional electronics suffer from electrolyte-induced instability 
and require long-term hermetic encapsulations.
5. Closing the Loop
With the goal of building intelligent bioelectronics, it is not 
enough to design sophisticated sensing and computational 
units. The potential of adaptive and smart circuitry for implant-
able devices lies in the possibility of combining local sensing 
process with efficient information processing and elicitation 
of a response. One advantages of the platforms discussed in 
this Perspective is that, as observed in Section  4, the sensing 
and computing mechanisms do not need to be separated units 
because of the intimate correlation between electrolytic envi-
ronment and OMIEC response that ultimately mediate the 
nonlinear response of the networks. Therefore, in order to pro-
duce fully autonomous med-tech, the last missing element is 
to equip the implant with an actuator, that is, a device/system 
that uses the output of the network to perform specific actions 
(apply voltages, inject currents, release chemicals, etc.). In 
turn, the actuators will modify the environment changing the 
output of the network, therefore closing the loop and allowing 
for autonomous implants. Similar to the biochemical feedback 
loops that make up for our physiological processes, human-
made devices must be able to interact with the surroundings, 
not only by collecting information, but also by acting upon it. 
An optimally trained network will activate only one neuron of 
the output layer, that is, it will classify correctly the inputs and 
result in a clear answer. The current or voltage at this neuron, 
then, can be amplified and used to drive an actuator. State-
of-the-art electronic implants require current pulses in the 
milliampere range to stimulate nerves, 100 to 1 mA for mus-
cles, and pulse durations in the range of hundreds of micro-
seconds.[74] OMIECs can be useful in this scenario too: first, 
metallic interfaces used to stimulate or record signals can be 
covered with conductive polymers in order to lower dramati-
cally their impedance, hence reducing the need of bulky power 
sources. Moreover, clever chemical design can lead to the incor-
poration of charged biomolecules within the polymeric matrix 
that, upon the application of a voltage, can be released in the 
surroundings.[75,76] Voltage-driven polymeric drug release sys-
tems can work with 1 V, that is, the voltage needed to elicit the 
redox reaction that mediates the release of a chemical. Other 
types of actuators, such as LED-based optical systems, can be 
driven with a current 50 mA. These are quantities that can be 
easily achieved by integrating a small amplification system at 
the output of the network. Therefore, the connection between 
computational unit and actuator does not seem to be the hard 
wall. Instead, what seems to be the limiting factor is the devel-
opment of better networks that achieve an accuracy similar to 
traditional ML approaches. At the same time, these must be 
durable to ensure long-term longevity and operation after the 
implantation. Moreover, hardware-based systems that allow for 
linear regression at the output layer, and can therefore activate 
only one neuron, will be key in future work. On a final note, the 
actuation device is arbitrary and by far not limited to OMIECs 
and electrochemical systems. The reader can refer to a recent 
review to dig into the latest advances in the field.[77]
6. Outlook
When showcasing single-device performances and projecting 
their systems for bioelectronics, authors should be solicited 
to pay attention on the final aim of circuit integration, and 
the properties of the device must be analyzed accordingly, for 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (13 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
example, in biological environments or phosphate-buffered 
saline solution, where device-to-device crosstalk may occur. In 
parallel, new approaches can be exploited in order to harness 
connectivity and global oscillations. These approaches are of 
particular value in neuromorphic computing, ML, and more 
in general biologically inspired information processing, where 
chemical signals orchestrate complex dynamics in a common 
electrolytic environment. Moreover, neural networks can be 
obtained by clever exploitation of the nonlinear dynamics 
arising from the crosstalk. In this scenario, device-to-device var-
iability and random designs are desirable. This route could lead 
to energy-efficiency and human-compatible hardware neural 
networks for on-chip (or edge) computing.
To better face these challenges, numerical circuit simula-
tions capable of predicting the response of multiple devices 
globally connected must be developed in order to run quick 
circuit modeling and optimization and accelerate the circuit 
design. At the current state, such a  quest is particularly diffi-
cult considering that even at a single-device level, simulations 
and experiments for OECTs and OMIECs are often in poor 
agreement. Moreover, although the electrolyte can be simulated 
using dense meshes of capacitors and resistors, these tools and 
user interfaces are not optimized for such tasks. Also, “nonide-
alities” such as chemical mechanisms and diffusive dynamics 
cannot be overlooked—in fact, they may be key to the rich tem-
poral dynamics which seem to be essential for power efficient 
on-chip computing.
Regarding classification tasks, in liquido computing in inher-
ently dynamic systems has been shown to be most efficient at 
the point of self-organized criticality (also known as the edge 
of chaos). For a given system, this point of criticality is given 
by the balance between the local, for example, the plasticity of 
an electronic device at an individual node, and the global cou-
plings, given by the conductivity of the surrounding electrolyte, 
the concentration of an analyte, temperature, etc. However, the 
bifurcation parameter bringing the system to the edge of chaos 
is system- and task-specific. Nonetheless, for a given network 
topology and input signals, the scaling behavior of a system 
should be explored by network and systems theoretician in 
order to understand how, for example, local couplings competes 
with global regulations (e.g., conductivity of the electrolyte) as a 
function of the network size/node dimensions, and when the 
transition to chaos occurs. Such scaling laws might provide effi-
cient guidelines for researchers implementing a network for a 
given task. Only by tackling these issues in a holistic way, we 
can reach a point where precise benchmarking can be assessed, 
and different approaches can be compared in a systematic way, 
an impossible tasks to do at the present state.
7. Conclusions
The design, fabrication, and modeling of electronics that can 
operate in liquid environments has been drawing increasing 
attention because conventional electronics seem to be insuffi-
cient for applications such as autonomous and power-efficient 
implants capable of information processing. Mixed ionic–
electronics conductors and OECTs emerged as ideal candidates 
for such a quest, although a blueprint to realize intelligent 
circuitry in liquid seems to be missing. Herein, we have dealt 
with the challenges, workarounds, and novel ideas concerning 
the implementation of complex circuitry based on OECTs, and 
it can be extended to other devices that can be gated through 
electrolytes. We have highlighted the recent trends, from the 
modeling standpoint to the implementation. Finally, recent 
applications of ML have been unpacked, revealing great poten-
tial for implantable in liquido computation using OMIECs and 
electrochemical transistors.
Acknowledgements
E.S. and D.P. acknowledge funding from the Swedish Research 
Council (VR-2017-04910) and the Swedish Foundation For Strategic 
Research (FFL18-0101). H.K. acknowledges the Bundesministerium für 
Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) for funding from the project BAYOEN 
(01IS21089) and the SPRIN-D agency
Open access funding provided by Ecole Polytechnique Federale de 
Lausanne.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
bioelectronics, electrochemical transistors, neuromorphic computing
Received: October 16, 2022
Revised: December 22, 2022
Published online: February 22, 2023
[1]	 R. Feiner, T. Dvir, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2017, 3, 17076.
[2]	 J. Yoo, M. Shoaran, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2021, 72, 95.
[3]	 U.  Shin, L.  Somappa, C.  Ding, Y.  Vyza, B.  Zhu, A.  Trouillet, 
S. P. Lacour, M. Shoaran, in 2022 IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. 
(ISSCC), IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA 2022, pp. 338–340.
[4]	 D. K.  Piech, B. C.  Johnson, K.  Shen, M. M.  Ghanbari, K. Y.  Li, 
R. M. Neely, J. E. Kay, J. M. Carmena, M. M. Maharbiz, R. Muller, 
Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2020, 4, 207.
[5]	 C.  Kathe, F.  Michoud, P.  Schönle, A.  Rowald, N.  Brun, J.  Ravier, 
I. Furfaro, V. Paggi, K. Kim, S. Soloukey, L. Asboth, T. H. Hutson, 
I.  Jelescu, A.  Philippides, N.  Alwahab, J.  Gandar, D.  Huber, 
C. I. De Zeeuw, Q. Barraud, Q. Huang, S. P. Lacour, G. Courtine, 
Nat. Biotechnol. 2022, 40, 198.
[6]	 K.  Berggren, Q.  Xia, K. K.  Likharev, D. B.  Strukov, H.  Jiang, 
T. Mikolajick, D. Querlioz, M. Salinga, J. R. Erickson, S. Pi, F. Xiong, 
P.  Lin, C.  Li, Y.  Chen, S.  Xiong, B. D.  Hoskins, M. W.  Daniels, 
A.  Madhavan, J. A.  Liddle, J. J.  McClelland, Y.  Yang, J.  Rupp, 
S. S. Nonnenmann, K.-T. Cheng, N. Gong, M. A. Lastras-Montaño, 
A. A. Talin, A. Salleo, B. J. Shastri, T. F. de Lima, et al., Nanotech-
nology 2020, 32, 012002.
[7]	 C.  Kaspar, B.  Ravoo, W. G.  van der  Wiel, S.  Wegner, W.  Pernice, 
Nature 2021, 594, 345.
[8]	 G.  Tanaka, T.  Yamane, J. B.  Héroux, R.  Nakane, N.  Kanazawa, 
S.  Takeda, H.  Numata, D.  Nakano, A.  Hirose, Neural Networks 
2019, 115, 100.
[9]	 M. Cucchi, S. Abreu, G. Ciccone, D. Brunner, H. Kleemann, Neuro-
morphic Comput. Eng. 2022, 2, 032002.
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (14 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
[10]	 R. M. Owens, G. G. Malliaras, MRS Bull. 2010, 35, 449.
[11]	 D.  Khodagholy, J. N.  Gelinas, T.  Thesen, W.  Doyle, O.  Devinsky, 
G. G. Malliaras, G. Buzsáki, Nat. Neurosci. 2015, 18, 310.
[12]	 D.  Khodagholy, T.  Doublet, P.  Quilichini, M.  Gurfinkel, P.  Leleux, 
A.  Ghestem, E.  Ismailova, T.  Hervé, S.  Sanaur, C.  Bernard, 
G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 1575.
[13]	 B. D.  Paulsen, K.  Tybrandt, E.  Stavrinidou, J.  Rivnay, Nat. Mater. 
2020, 19, 13.
[14]	 M. Cucchi, A. Weissbach, L. M. Bongartz, R. Kantelberg, H. Tseng, 
H. Kleemann, K. Leo, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 4514.
[15]	 E.  Stavrinidou, P.  Leleux, H.  Rajaona, D.  Khodagholy, J.  Rivnay, 
M. Lindau, S. Sanaur, G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 4488.
[16]	 P.  Romele, M.  Ghittorelli, Z. M.  Kovács-Vajna, F.  Torricelli, Nat. 
Commun. 2019, 10, 3044.
[17]	 M.  Berggren, E. D.  Głowacki, D. T.  Simon, E.  Stavrinidou, 
K. Tybrandt, Chem. Rev. 2022, 122, 4826.
[18]	 D. A. Bernards, G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2007, 17, 3538.
[19]	 P. Lin, F. Yan, H. L. Chan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2010, 2, 1637.
[20]	 H. Tseng, M. Cucchi, A. Weissbach, K. Leo, H. Kleemann, ACS Appl. 
Electron. Mater. 2021, 3, 3898.
[21]	 Y.  Yan, Q.  Chen, X.  Wu, X.  Wang, E.  Li, Y.  Ke, Y.  Liu, H.  Chen, 
T. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 49915.
[22]	 L. Wang, Q. Sun, L. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Ren, L. Yu, K. Wang, Y. Zhu, 
G. Lu, H.-D. Yu, Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2022, 43, 2200212.
[23]	 D.  Khodagholy, J.  Rivnay, M.  Sessolo, M.  Gurfinkel, P.  Leleux, 
L. H.  Jimison, E.  Stavrinidou, T.  Herve, S.  Sanaur, R. M.  Owens, 
G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2133.
[24]	 M. Nishinaka, H. Jinno, Y. Jimbo, S. Lee, J. Wang, W. Lee, T. Yokota, 
T. Someya, Small Struct. 2021, 2, 2000088.
[25]	 A.  Weissbach, L. M.  Bongartz, M.  Cucchi, H.  Tseng, K.  Leo, 
H. Kleemann, J. Mater. Chem. C 2022, 10, 2656.
[26]	 J. Lenz, F. Del Giudice, F. R. Geisenhof, F. Winterer, R. T. Weitz, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2019, 14, 579.
[27]	 G. D. Spyropoulos, J. N. Gelinas, D. Khodagholy, Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, 
eaau7378.
[28]	 H. Shen, A. Abtahi, B. Lussem, B. W. Boudouris, J. Mei, ACS Appl. 
Electron. Mater. 2021, 3, 2434.
[29]	 P.  Romele, P.  Gkoupidenis, D. A.  Koutsouras, K.  Lieberth, 
Z. M. Kovács-Vajna, P. W. Blom, F. Torricelli, Nat. Commun. 2020, 
11, 3743.
[30]	 P. Andersson Ersman, R. Lassnig, J. Strandberg, D. Tu, V. Keshmiri, 
R.  Forchheimer, S.  Fabiano, G.  Gustafsson, M.  Berggren, Nat. 
Commun. 2019, 10, 5053.
[31]	 P. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Lu, H. Sun, W. Wang, D. Xu, IEEE Trans. Ind. 
Appl. 2019, 55, 7736.
[32]	 J.  Rivnay, P.  Leleux, M.  Ferro, M.  Sessolo, A.  Williamson, 
D. A.  Koutsouras, D.  Khodagholy, M.  Ramuz, X.  Strakosas, 
R. M. Owens, C. Benar, J.-M. Badier, C. Bernard, G. G. Malliaras, 
Sci. Adv. 2015, 1, e1400251.
[33]	 H.  Tseng, A.  Weissbach, J.  Kucinski, A.  Solgi, R.  Nair, 
L. M. Bongartz, G. Ciccone, M. Cucchi, K. Leo, H. Kleemann, Adv. 
Mater. Interfaces 2022, https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202201914
[34]	 M.  Cucchi, C.  Gruener, L.  Petrauskas, P.  Steiner, H.  Tseng, 
A.  Fischer, B.  Penkovsky, C.  Matthus, P.  Birkholz, H.  Kleemann, 
K. Leo, Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, eabh0693.
[35]	 G. C. Faria, D. T. Duong, A. Salleo, Org. Electron. 2017, 45, 215.
[36]	 P. R.  Paudel, M.  Skowrons, D.  Dahal, R. K.  Radha Krishnan, 
B. Lüssem, Adv. Theory Simul. 2022, 5, 2100563.
[37]	 G. G. Turrigiano, S. B. Nelson, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2004, 5, 97.
[38]	 P. Gkoupidenis, D. A. Koutsouras, G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun. 
2017, 8, 15448.
[39]	 P.  Gkoupidenis, S.  Rezaei-Mazinani, C. M.  Proctor, E.  Ismailova, 
G. G. Malliaras, AIP Adv. 2016, 6, 111307.
[40]	 P.  Gkoupidenis, D. A.  Koutsouras, T.  Lonjaret, J. A.  Fairfield, 
G. G. Malliaras, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 27007.
[41]	 P. Gkoupidenis, N. Schaefer, B. Garlan, G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. 
2015, 27, 7176.
[42]	 D. A.  Koutsouras, T.  Prodromakis, G. G.  Malliaras, P. W.  Blom, 
P. Gkoupidenis, Adv. Intell. Syst. 2019, 1, 1900013.
[43]	 D. A. Koutsouras, M. H. Amiri, P. W. Blom, F. Torricelli, K. Asadi, 
P. Gkoupidenis, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2011013.
[44]	 C. Qian, L.-a. Kong, J. Yang, Y. Gao, J. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 
110, 083302.
[45]	 J. Y.  Gerasimov, R.  Gabrielsson, R.  Forchheimer, E.  Stavrinidou, 
D. T. Simon, M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, Adv. Sci. 2019, 6, 1801339.
[46]	 J. Y.  Gerasimov, D.  Zhao, A.  Sultana, T.  Abrahamsson, S.  Han, 
D. Bliman, D. Tu, D. T. Simon, R. Olsson, X. Crispin, M. Berggren, 
S. Fabiano, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2021, 7, 2001126.
[47]	 M.  Cucchi, H.  Kleemann, H.  Tseng, G.  Ciccone, A.  Lee, D.  Pohl, 
K. Leo, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2021, 7, 2100586.
[48]	 G.  Ciccone, M.  Cucchi, Y.  Gao, A.  Kumar, L. M.  Seifert, 
A. Weissbach, H. Tseng, H. Kleemann, F. Alibart, K. Leo, Discover 
Mater. 2022, 2, 7.
[49]	 Y. van De Burgt, A. Melianas, S. T. Keene, G. Malliaras, A. Salleo, 
Nat. Electron. 2018, 1, 386.
[50]	 Y. Van De Burgt, E. Lubberman, E. J. Fuller, S. T. Keene, G. C. Faria, 
S.  Agarwal, M. J.  Marinella, A. Alec  Talin, A.  Salleo, Nat. Mater. 
2017, 16, 414.
[51]	 S. J. Wilks, A. J. Woolley, L. Ouyang, D. C. Martin, K. J. Otto, in 2011 
Annual Int. Conf. of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA 2011, pp. 5412–5415.
[52]	 J. M.  Murbach, S.  Currlin, A.  Widener, Y.  Tong, S.  Chhatre, 
V.  Subramanian, D. C.  Martin, B. N.  Johnson, K. J.  Otto, MRS 
Commun. 2018, 8, 1043.
[53]	 Y. Koizumi, N. Shida, M. Ohira, H. Nishiyama, I. Tomita, S. Inagi, 
Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 10404.
[54]	 D.  Mantione, E.  Istif, G.  Dufil, L.  Vallan, D.  Parker, E.  Brochon, 
E.  Cloutet, G.  Hadziioannou, M.  Berggren, E.  Stavrinidou, 
E. Pavlopoulou, Appl. Electron. Mater. 2020, 2, 4065.
[55]	 G.  Tommasini, G.  Dufil, F.  Fardella, X.  Strakosas, E.  Fergola, 
T.  Abrahamsson, D.  Bliman, R.  Olsson, M.  Berggren, A.  Tino, 
E. Stavrinidou C. Tortiglione, Bioact. Mater. 2022, 10, 107.
[56]	 E. 
Stavrinidou, 
R. 
Gabrielsson, 
P. 
Nilsson, 
S. 
Kumar, 
F. Franco-Gonzalez, A. Volkov, M. Jonsson, A. Grimoldi, M. Elgland, 
I. Zozoulenko, D. T. Simon, M. Berggren, Appl. Phys. Sci. 2017, 114, 
2807.
[57]	 G.  Dufil, D.  Parker, J. Y.  Gerasimov, T.-Q.  Nguyen, M.  Berggren, 
E. Stavrinidou, J. Mater. Chem. B 2020, 8, 4221.
[58]	 D. Parker, Y. Daguerre, G. Dufil, D. Mantione, E. Solano, E. Cloutet, 
G.  Hadziioannou, T.  Näsholm, M.  Berggren, E.  Pavlopoulou, 
E. Stavrinidou, Mater. Horiz. 2021, 8, 3295.
[59]	 E.  Stavrinidou, R.  Gabrielsson, E.  Gomez, X.  Crispin, O.  Nilsson, 
D. T. Simon, M. Berggren, Sci. Adv. 2015, 1, e1501136.
[60]	 O.  Pieters, T.  De Swaef, M.  Stock, F.  wyffels, Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 
12594.
[61]	 E. J.  Fuller, S. T.  Keene, A.  Melianas, Z.  Wang, S.  Agarwal, Y.  Li, 
Y.  Tuchman, C. D.  James, M. J.  Marinella, J. J.  Yang, A.  Salleo, 
A. Alec Talin, Science 2019, 364, 570.
[62]	 M.  Akai-Kasaya, N.  Hagiwara, W.  Hikita, M.  Okada, Y.  Sugito, 
Y. Kuwahara, T. Asai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2020, 59, 060601.
[63]	 P. R. Huttenlocher, Brain Res. 1979, 163, 195.
[64]	 W.  Maass, T.  Natschläger, H.  Markram, Neural Comput. 2002, 14, 
2531.
[65]	 H. Jaeger, H. Haas, Science 2004, 304, 78.
[66]	 J.  Li, Y.  Liu, L.  Yuan, B.  Zhang, E. S.  Bishop, K.  Wang, J.  Tang, 
Y.-Q. Zheng, W. Xu, S. Niu, L. Beker, T. L. Li, G. Chen, M. Diyaolu, 
A.-L. Thomas, V. Mottini, J. B.-H. Tok, J. C. Y. Dunn, B. Cui, S. P. Pasca, 
Y. Cui, A. Habtezion, X. Chen, Z. Bao, Nature 2022, 606, 94.
[67]	 G.  Milano, G.  Pedretti, K.  Montano, S.  Ricci, S.  Hashemkhani, 
L. Boarino, D. Ielmini, C. Ricciardi, Nat. Mater. 2022, 21, 195.
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2209516  (15 of 15)
© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209516
[68]	 M.  Dale, J. F.  Miller, S.  Stepney, M. A.  Trefzer, in Int. Conf. on 
Unconventional Computation and Natural Computation, Springer, 
Cham, Switzerland 2016, pp. 49–61.
[69]	 S.  Kan, K.  Nakajima, T.  Asai, M.  Akai-Kasaya, Adv. Sci. 2022, 9, 
2104076.
[70]	 S.  Pecqueur, M. Mastropasqua  Talamo, D.  Guérin, P.  Blanchard, 
J.  Roncali, D.  Vuillaume, F.  Alibart, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2018, 4, 
1800166.
[71]	 L. Petrauskas, M. Cucchi, C. Grüner, F. Ellinger, K. Leo, C. Matthus, 
H. Kleemann, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2021, 8, 2100330.
[72]	 Y.  Usami, B.  van de  Ven, D. G.  Mathew, T.  Chen, T.  Kotooka, 
Y.  Kawashima, Y.  Tanaka, Y.  Otsuka, H.  Ohoyama, H.  Tamukoh, 
H. Tanaka, W. G. van der Wiel, T. Matsumoto, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 
2102688.
[73]	 X. Huang, H. Londoño-Ramírez, M. Ballini, C. Van Hoof, J. Genoe, 
S. Haesler, G. Gielen, N. Van Helleputte, C. M. Lopez, IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits 2022, 57, 3312.
[74]	 A. Ben Amar, A. B. Kouki, H. Cao, Sensors 2015, 15, 28889.
[75]	 E. Castagnola, S. Carli, M. Vomero, A. Scarpellini, M. Prato, N. Goshi, 
L. Fadiga, S. Kassegne, D. Ricci, Biointerphases 2017, 12, 031002.
[76]	 C. Kleber, K. Lienkamp, J. Rühe, M. Asplund, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2019, 8, 1801488.
[77]	 G. Bhave, J. C. Chen, A. Singer, A. Sharma, J. T. Robinson, Mater. 
Today 2021, 46, 125.
 15214095, 2023, 15, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202209516 by University Of Chicago, Wiley Online Library on [09/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

