Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
Available online 16 March 2023
0927-796X/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Organic microelectrode arrays for bioelectronic applications 
Zixuan Lu a, Aimie Pavia b,c, Achilleas Savva a, Loig Kergoat b,c, R´oisín M. Owens a,* 
a Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Philippa Fawcett Drive, CB3 0AS Cambridge, UK 
b Department of Flexible Electronics, Ecole Nationale Sup´erieure des Mines, CMP-EMSE, 13541 Gardanne, France 
c Panaxium SAS, 13100 Aix-en-Provence, France   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Multi-electrode arrays 
Electrodes 
Microfabrication 
Bioelectronics 
Organic mixed conductors 
PEDOT:PSS 
A B S T R A C T   
Microelectrode arrays (MEAs) are devices that gather multiple microscopic electrodes in a small area and are 
used to electrically record and/or stimulate the biological activity of cells. Recently, MEAs that use organic mixed 
ionic and electronic conductors (OMIECs) as active materials, have gained significant attention due to the 
profound advantages over traditional metal-based MEAs. OMIECs, usually polymer-based, can be processed from 
solution and offer high-charge capacitance and mechanical properties that match those of cells. These advantages 
offer organic microelectrode arrays with a high signal-to-noise ratio and low electrochemical impedance. Organic 
MEAs (OMEAs) have been applied for in vivo applications, showing outstanding biocompatibility and lowering 
the “foreign body responses”. They have also been applied for the study of in vitro systems with various scales, 
such as tissues (macroscopic), cells (microscopic), membranes (nanoscale thickness), and biomolecules (nano­
scopic). Here we present an overview of OMEA technology. First, we discuss the properties of OMIECs and the 
benefits over traditional MEA technology. Then, we introduce OMEAs device physics based on typical electro­
chemical techniques and discuss exemplar OMIECs for OMEAs. We then present an overview of microfabrication 
methods for functional OMEAs. Finally, we collect together recent breakthroughs in device design and novel 
bioelectronic applications of OMEAs, spanning from in vivo long-term implants for electroactive recordings to in 
vitro systems for drug discovery, among others. The possibility of using light-sensitive and optically transparent 
OMEAs to optically stimulate biological activity is also discussed in this section. Overall, we put together all 
aspects necessary for further advancement of OMEAs technology, i.e. fundamental materials and device prin­
ciples, fabrication and bioelectronic applications to foster further advances of OMEA technologies.   
1. Organic mixed ionic/electronic conductors (OMIECs) 
Intercellular activity and communication usually rely on ionic 
transport. However, traditional electronics based on metal, metal oxide, 
and other semiconducting materials have advantages for processing 
electronic signals but are unable to transduce these ionic signals. 
Therefore, inorganic materials used as active sensing materials can limit 
signal detection and amplification between biotic and abiotic interfaces 
[1] Single crystal semiconductors (such as Si, Fig. 1(a)), the most com­
mon materials for electronics, consist of a rigid lattice of covalent bonds. 
In order to have mobile charges in the silicon lattice, elements are often 
added into the lattice as dopants by either direct addition during 
single-crystal formation or post-addition during device fabrication [2,3]. 
Group III and group V elements can accept holes (positive mobile 
charge) and electrons contributing to the conduction in the lattice, 
respectively [1]. Often, the charge carriers in the silicon lattice have 
very high mobility (around 103 cm2/V⋅s electron mobility with 1022 m-3 
dopant concentration at 300 K) [4], but little if any ionic conductivity. 
Since ionic currents are crucial for signaling in biological systems, the 
inorganic semiconducting material cannot support communication at 
biological-electronic interfaces. 
Organic mixed ionic/electronic conductors (OMIECs), usually con­
jugated polymers, represent a new class of conducting materials that 
show great promise for bioelectronic applications [5,6]. OMIECs can 
support mixed ionic and electronic conduction, and therefore exhibit 
many advantages for interfacing with biological systems. First of all, the 
modification of π-conjugation and the attachment of side-chain groups 
allows modulation of the mixed conduction properties of the polymer 
[1]. For example, for a bithiophene-thienothiophene backbone (2 T-TT), 
when the side chains are switched from alkoxy side chains to glycol side 
chains, the ionic injection into the film is facilitated without decreasing 
electric motility [7]. Nielsen et al. have shown that the molecular design 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: rmo37@cam.ac.uk (R.M. Owens).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Materials Science & Engineering R 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mser 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mser.2023.100726 
Received 19 December 2022; Received in revised form 15 February 2023; Accepted 23 February 2023   

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
2
of the backbone of a series of OMIECs can be tuned in many aspects, such 
as ion and hole transport, electrochromic properties, operational 
voltage, and material stability [8]. Second, OMIECs used as the active 
material for bioelectronics are usually deposited from solution, without 
the need for high-temperature processing [1]. A wide range of solution 
processing methods is used such as spin coating [9], inkjet printing [10, 
11], screen printing [12], and in situ electrochemical polymerization 
[13,14]. Third, unlike silicon, OMIECs provide an oxide-free biotic 
interface and therefore, maximize the communication between ion­
ic/biological charge with electronics [1,15]. Relatively large distances 
and weak van der Waals forces between the organic molecule chains 
allow water molecules and hydrated ions to move into the material [1,6, 
Fig. 1. (a)-(b)The structural differences between inorganic semiconductor materials and organic mixed conductors for bioelectronics: (a) scheme and structure of the 
rigid lattice of boron (p-type) doped single crystal silicon with silicon dioxide layer; (b) scheme and structure of a disordered PEDOT:PSS film in a biological 
environment allowing ionic conduction within the material [1]. (c) An energy-level diagram of a microelectrode operation in the electrolyte with five phases: (1) a 
hole is injected from the metal electrode into the HOMO level of the polymer (HOMO and LUMO refer to highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals, 
respectively); (2) the hole is transported in the delocalized HOMO level in the polymer; (3) the anion is driven into the polymer by the potential; (4) anion travel 
within the free volume between the polymer chains and crystals; (5) electrostatic compensation of holes and anions at the combination site in the bulk [28].(d) 
Scheme of organic microelectrode three-electrode measurement set up with equivalent circuit (Re is electrolyte resistance, and Ce is the OMIEC capacitance). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
3
16]. This “volumetric” injection of the ions into the organic materials 
directly influences the electronic carrier population and gives rise to 
high charge capacitance values, promoting OMIECs as efficient elec­
tronic transducers of biological signals [15]. 
The most commonly used material in microelectrodes and in the field 
of 
organic 
bioelectronics, 
in 
general, 
is 
poly(3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT: 
PSS), shown in Fig. 1(b). The p-type PEDOT has π-conjugation in its 
backbone, through which the mobile charges are transported [1,15]. 
With the presence of the negatively charged dopant poly(styrene sul­
fonate) (PSS), the holes on the backbone of poly(3,4 -ethyl­
enedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) are stabilized, and hole mobility 
drastically increases. PEDOT:PSS is a highly conducting material with 
conductivity values reported up to 2500 S/cm [17,18]. In addition, the 
hydrophilic nature of the macromolecular dopant PSS allows for hy­
drated metal ion transport [1,15]. On top of all the above, biocompat­
ibility [15], tissue-like mechanical properties [19], transparency [20], 
long-term stability in cell culture [21], resistance to physical deforma­
tion [22], autoclavability [23], and commercial availability are high­
lighted advantages of PEDOT:PSS for bioelectronic applications. Prime 
examples of these applications include electroactive cell recording [24], 
barrier-tissue integrity monitoring [25], metabolite sensing [26], drug 
delivery [27], bioimaging [20], and many others. 
Reproduced with permission from: [1,28] (For interpretation of the 
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the 
web version of this article.). 
2. Organic microelectrodes arrays (OMEAs): working principles, 
device physics and materials 
2.1. Working principles 
Organic microelectrodes are one of the most common devices used in 
bioelectronics for a wide range of applications, such as recording, 
sensing and stimulating of biological events. Usually, OMIECs are coated 
on traditional metal electrodes and act as active-functional materials for 
interfacing biological systems [29,30]. In the literature, the term organic 
microelectrode arrays (OMEAs) is sometimes used for organic electro­
chemical transistor arrays [31]. However, in this review, we focus on the 
development of materials, methods and technologies of OMEAs since the 
organic electrochemical transistor technology has been recently 
reviewed elsewhere [15,32]. 
For a traditional metal (such as gold) electrode, the ions are accu­
mulated at the metal-electrolyte interface forming an electric-double 
Fig. 2. (a)-(c) The EIS of OMIEC coated electrodes: (a) The impedance lowering effect of PEDOT:PSS coated electrode comparing to gold electrode [9].. (b) the 
impedance (red) and phase (blue) versus frequency plots (Bode plot) of typical PEDOT:PSS coated circular electrode (450 µm electrode diameter and 100 nm PEDOT: 
PSS thickness) with resistive (Re) and capacitive (Cp) regimes labelled by the electrode circuit; (c) The semicircle characteristics of a bio-barrier (lipid membrane, 
purple dots) presented in Nyquist plot (PEDOT:PSS electrode is presented in red dots). (d) and (e) cyclic voltammetry (I-V plots) for the Faradaic and the capacitive 
processes of OMIEC-coated electrodes, respectively [28,42]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [9,28,42] (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
4
layer, which can be considered as a capacitor. As mentioned earlier, the 
volumetric ionic-electronic interaction of OMIECs films gives rise to 
much higher capacitance values, compared to metal electrodes, and 
allows for more sensitive micro-electrode arrays for recording biological 
activity. The working principle of OMIEC-coated metal electrodes is 
shown in the energy diagram of Fig. 1(c) and the charge transport 
processes can be described in 5 phases [28]. From the working electrode 
(WE), a hole is injected into the highest occupied molecular orbitals 
(HOMO) (Phase 1). The holes can be transported through the delo­
calized HOMO throughout the polymer chain (Phase 2). Meanwhile, the 
anions are drifted by the potential applied by the counter electrode to­
ward the polymer film (Phase 3). Then, the anions can travel within the 
free volume between the polymer crystals and chains (Phase 4). Lastly, 
the hole and the anion electrostatically compensate each other at a 
combination site (Phase 5). As a result, an organic (PEDOT:PSS) elec­
trode is one order of magnitude lower in impedance compared to bare 
gold electrodes of the same area (Fig. 2(a)) [9,21]. This relates to the 
charge-storage capacity of OMIECs, and this property can be described 
as volumetric capacitance (C*) [14,33,34]. Since the impedance of the 
capacitive component is inversely proportional to the capacitance (Eq. 
1), OMIEC-coated metal electrodes are much more sensitive compared 
to traditional metal electrodes [35,36],  
Zc= 1/(j2πfC)                                                                                  
(1) 
where f is the frequency; C is the capacitance; j is the imaginary number 
unit. 
In general, the impedance of the electrodes is one of the most 
important figures of merits to evaluate their conducting and capacitive 
characteristics. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is usually 
used to evaluate the impedance at either steady-state (i.e. fixed fre­
quency) or in a given frequency range. Other important measurements 
to evaluate OMEAs properties are cyclic voltammetry (CV), chro­
noamperometry (CA), and linear sweep voltammetry. Usually, all the 
above-mentioned measurements are performed with a three-electrode 
(non-transistor) configuration as shown in Fig. 1(d). The organic 
microelectrode is the working electrode (WE), where the electro­
chemical event of interest is occurring – i.e. biological activity. The 
current is applied by the counter electrode (CE) to sustain the ionic 
interaction within the OMIEC of the WE. The reference electrode (RE) is 
essential to control the potential and avoid potential fluctuation caused 
by large current changes [37]. The common practice is to place and 
submerge RE and CE in an electrolyte solution. The RE is usually made of 
Ag/AgCl 
because 
it 
is 
a 
material 
that 
operates 
under 
a 
reduction-oxidation reaction [38]. Generally, applied voltage has an 
unknown voltage drop at the CE-electrolyte interface. RE employs a 
feedback loop to set voltage drop across the CE-electrolyte interface as a 
known constant. This eliminates the double-layer-capacitance effect of 
CE to maintain applied voltage throughout the electrolyte before 
reaching the WE surface. However, it is suggested that for in vivo OMEA 
applications Ag/AgCl electrodes could be avoided due to long-term 
toxicity effects on cells and tissue [39]. 
2.2. Frequency-dependent characteristics of OMEAs 
EIS is one of the most commonly used techniques for evaluating the 
transient characteristics of OMEAs. A sinusoidal voltage with varying 
frequency is applied between the WE and the CE, and the impedance is 
recorded. According to Ohm’s law, the impedance is determined by the 
division of the applied alternating voltage with the recorded alternating 
current signal [35]. The impedance magnitude and phase can be plotted 
against the corresponding voltage frequency; this is the Bode plot (Fig. 2 
(a) and (b)). In an ideal case, the impedance of a resistor is independent 
of the frequency, and it is shown as a horizontal line. The capacitive 
component can be expressed by Eq. (1), so when both the y-axis 
(impedance) and x-axis (frequency) are plotted on a logarithmic scale, 
the behaviour of the capacitor is a straight line with a slope of −1. The 
OMIEC-coated microelectrode has both resistive (electrolyte resistance 
(Re)) and capacitive (OMIEC capacitance (Cp)) behaviour and the 
equivalent circuit is shown as the red curve in Fig. 2(b), which is 
modelled as Re in series with Cp [14]. Therefore, at higher frequencies 
(103 – 105 Hz), the electrode is in the resistive regime, which behaves 
almost like a horizontal segment (Fig. 2(b)). At low frequencies (10-1 – 
103 Hz), the same electrode operates in the capacitive regime. 
Furthermore, the voltage is often applied as a sinusoidal waveform, so 
the current response could have a time shift caused by the characteristics 
of the circuit elements. This time shift is often expressed as an angular 
phase difference between the voltage and current waves [35]. This 
phase shift is plotted against each frequency on a phase diagram (Fig. 2 
(b), blue curve). A resistor’s current response is immediate, so the phase 
is located around 0◦. As a result of capacitance-induced current lagging 
90◦from the voltage input, a horizontal flat line appears along the 90◦
mark. Therefore, for an organic microelectrode, in the resistive regime, 
the negative phase remains around 0◦, and once reaching the capacitive 
regime, the negative phase stays at 90◦. 
These frequency-dependent measurements can be roughly divided 
into different regimes and used to extract information about the 
capacitive and resistive nature of OMEAs. Resistance dominates the EIS 
signal at high frequencies while capacitance dominates at lower fre­
quencies. The further addition of biological substances or bio-events can 
be directly sensed with the OMEAs, which are indicated by a fluctuation 
of extra capacitance (a slope) or resistance (a plateau) elements within 
the system. These features in EIS Bode plots can also be represented in 
the form of a Nyquist plot - plotting the imaginary part versus the real 
part of the impedance - as shown in Fig. 2(c). For example, a lipid bilayer 
on the surface of a PEDOT:PSS coated gold electrode increases the 
impedance of the electrode which causes the appearance of a semicircle 
in the Nyquist plot. Hence, by using EIS and analyzing the impedance 
magnitude, phase, and real/imaginary parts over a range of frequencies, 
we can evaluate OMEA characteristics as well as monitor biological 
events. 
2.3. Steady-state electrical characteristics of OMEAs 
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a commonly used technique to evaluate 
OMEA properties in steady-state (i.e constant frequency). In CV, the 
current of the working electrode is recorded over a range of voltages that 
is applied with respect to a RE (also called electrochemical potential) 
[37]. The shape of the CV is a valuable indication of the operating 
mechanism of OMIEC-coated metal electrodes. As shown in Fig. 2d and 
e, the CV shapes can be distinguished into two general categories. A 
“duck-shaped” CV plot would indicate faradaic reactions (Fig. 2d) that 
involve charge transfer between the working electrode and electrolyte 
species (e.g. oxygen). In fact, redox molecules that induce faradaic re­
actions are very popular in OMEAs for biosensing technologies. When a 
redox species (X) is present, the forward voltage scan induces an 
oxidation reaction, the anodic current rises and reaches a peak as the 
oxidation species X start to deplete while X+ accumulate at the surface of 
the electrode [37]. Later on, the anodic current declines to the switching 
point (SP) where the species X+ is zero at the electrode surface. When 
the electrochemical potential is reversed, the reduction reaction is 
initiated, converting Xþ back to X and the cathodic (reduction) current 
behaves in the same fashion as the anodic (oxidation) current curve. 
In the case of PEDOT:PSS and other OMIEC-coated microelectrodes, 
the CV is “box-shaped”, indicative of a capacitive movement of charges 
and non-faradaic processes. This mode of operation is known to be as 
follows: ions injected from the electrolyte are electrostatically bound to 
charges within PEDOT:PSS. No charge transfer is involved in the pro­
cess, but only the capacitive movement of electrons and ions. Therefore, 
negatively charged ions are injected (e.g. Cl-), destabilize PEDOT+ PSS- 
electrostatic bonds, and dope PEDOT:PSS, resulting in a change in the 
current recorded in a CV [16,40]. This operation is well explained in the 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
5
literature for PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 2(e)) [28]. 
Recently a deeper understanding of the properties of organic mi­
croelectrodes based on steady-state measurements has been developed. 
Ganji. et al. observed that the enhancement of charge injection capacity 
was up to 9.5 times greater by coating microelectrodes with PEDOT:PSS 
compared to bare metal (Au) electrodes, and the maximum injected 
current increased with scaling of the electrode size [41]. Also, PEDOT: 
PSS/Au organic microelectrodes demonstrated an excellent capability of 
converting available stored charge into an injected electrical pulse 
because of its high charge injection capacity to charge storage capacity 
(CIC/CSC) ratio [41]. By combining the measurements of CV and quartz 
crystal microbalance (QCM), Savva. et al. showed that the thickness of 
the film influences the de-doping efficiency [16]. The thicker PEDOT: 
PSS film (~300 nm) can receive many more cations at the compensation 
sites and trap more cation and water molecules within the film even 
when the driving potential is paused. Thus, if a sensitive ionic current 
detection or delivery is needed, the thickness of the film is a direct factor 
to be considered. 
2.4. Materials 
Organic microelectrode arrays use organic mixed ionic/electronic 
conductors (OMIECs) as the “active” materials. By various patterning 
techniques (in Section 3), OMIECs can be deposited onto metal (e.g. Au) 
electrodes and function as the active surface for biological applications. 
Also, many OMIECs have been reported as efficient and promising 
channel materials for organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs). 
However, microelectrode technology is still dominated by PEDOT:PSS, 
since it is efficient in lowering the impedance of gold electrodes and 
finds many applications in bioelectronics. The figures of merit that 
define the mixed conduction properties of PEDOT:PSS are electrical 
conductivity [43], ion mobility [44], and volumetric capacitance (C*) 
[33]. These can all be evaluated with the techniques mentioned in the 
previous section. 
An important advantage of OMIECs is that the mixed conduction 
properties can be tuned by chemical synthesis, enabling a wide library of 
materials to be developed. PEDOT:PSS was originally developed based 
on the conjugated polymer named polythiophene (PT), which can be 
doped in air and form stable compounds with high conductivity (300 – 
400 S cm-1), but PT loses conductivity during oxidation [45]. Impor­
tantly, once phenyl, ethyl, or alkoxy groups substitute the position 3 
carbon (red letter-labelled in Table 1) on the thiophene ring, the electric 
properties are preserved for a longer time [45,46]. This approach was 
used and the highly conducting polymer, Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy 
thiophene) (PEDOT), was developed. PEDOT-based materials can be 
further doped with stable dopants as the case of PEDOT doped with poly 
(styrene sulfonate) (PSS). PSS functions as a hydrated ion conductor and 
greatly improves the ion transport and capacitance of PEDOT:PSS thin 
films [34,47]. Although for most bioelectronic applications PEDOT:PSS 
is an excellent active material, in some cases increased volumetric 
capacitance is necessary by doping PEDOT with smaller anionic mole­
cules [48]. Examples include the small molecule tosylate (TOS, the 
pendant group in PSS, Table 1), which results in more available 
anion/hole sites within the films and C* is improved with a neglected 
change of electronic mobility [15,48]. A large range of PEDOT-based 
mixed conductors has been reported by mixing different additives dur­
ing polymerization as reported in a recent review by Donahue et al. [49]. 
Besides PEDOT:PSS, and polythiophene-based materials some other 
OMIECs have emerged from other “classic” conjugated polymers. Poly­
aniline (PANI), a p-type semiconductor and shows conductivity when 
present in acidic environments (pH < 3) [50]. However, the redox 
properties of OMIECs derived from PANI can be disoriented in the 
presence of oxygen, resulting in unstable materials. For example, Dhand. 
et al. showed that the presence of oxygen-induced an ageing problem, 
and the PANI had a dramatic loss of conductivity after a few CV cycles 
[50]. Another conjugated polymer that was used prior to PEDOT:PSS is 
polypyrrole (PPy), one of the earliest OMIECs applied in the field of 
organic bioelectronics. It has high intrinsic volumetric capacitance 
(400–500 F cm-3) [51]. However, the dense arrangement within the 
bulk blocks the dopant ion access to the interior sites, so a thicker PPy 
does not have a high capacitance per mass [52]. PPy also shows con­
ductivity degradation once the voltage potential is applied above 
0.3–0.4 mV [53,54]. 
Recently, semi-conducting materials have emerged as interesting 
OMIECs for bioelectronics. Unlike PEDOT:PSS, these materials are 
undoped and comprise only a semi-conducting conjugated polymer 
backbone [55]. Generally, undoped OMIECs have low electronic con­
ductivity but excellent mixed conductivity in physiologically relevant 
buffers, aqueous electrolytes, and can either support p-type conduction 
(holes) or n-type conduction (electrons). Although these undoped ma­
terials have not yet been used extensively in microelectrode arrays, their 
operation principles and material properties have been proven efficient 
for biosensing mostly based on OECTs. A few examples include the 
p-type material, p(g2T-TT) is still currently holding the record for the 
highest µ and *C values for all the materials [7,8]. 
The n-type, NDI-T2 copolymer, with a higher density of glycol 
chains, demonstrates a gradual increase of volumetric capacitance and 
water uptake [56]. However, when 25% of the alkyl chains were 
replaced by glycol chains, electron mobility decreased by more than two 
orders of magnitude. Therefore, side-chain engineering is a new route to 
modify the electric and ionic properties of OMIECs. One of the most used 
materials from this family in electrodes is P90, which have been applied 
for lactate sensing [57], glucose sensing [58], and lipid membrane 
detection [59]. Finally, an interesting n-type material for bioelectronics 
is the semiconducting Poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) (BBL). 
This polymer has been reported for the fabrication of inverter circuits 
and shows great electron mobility, volumetric capacitance, and water 
uptake [60,61]. It has been suggested to be a benchmark to the 
future-developed n-type materials. Recently, a conductive n-type ink 
was developed based on BBL and is believed to further expand its 
applicability and its use in OMEA technologies [62]. 
3. Organic microelectrode arrays (OMEAs) fabrication 
An OMEA is generally made of 4 distinctive parts: (1) substrate, (2) 
conductive tracks, usually made of highly conducting metals, (3) insu­
lation layer to isolate individual electrodes and avoid crosstalk between 
devices, and (4) the OMIEC as the active areas. 
The substrate is the platform on which every element of the MEAs is 
built during the microfabrication steps. Rigid MEAs used for in vitro 
testing are generally built on two types of material substrates: silicon 
and glass/quartz. Both can be easily cleaved into individual chips. 
Transparent glass/quartz substrates enable applications where high 
optical transmission is required, so they are typically preferred for op­
tical monitoring. However, many in vivo OMEA applications require 
matching of the mechanical and chemical properties of the OMEA with 
tissues and the biological environment. Therefore, flexible substrates, 
such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)[66], parylene C (PaC)[67], and 
alginate hydrogel[68]etc., have also been used. They provide excellent 
thermal, chemical, and mechanical characteristics to endure the 
different fabrication process steps. Plus, the surface topology and 
roughness of these substrates mechanically impact the attachment of the 
metal conductive tracks and insulation layers. Therefore, an 
adhesion-promoting treatment is favourable if delamination occurs be­
tween the attached layer and the substrate. 
The second component is the conductive track. They are usually 
made of a material with excellent electrical conductivity (i.e. low 
resistance) for the transmission of electrical signals from the electro­
physiological recording sites. For applications where biological mole­
cules/cells are interfaced, biocompatible materials are preferred during 
the fabrication of the MEA to reduce toxicity risks. In that sense, gold, 
platinum, titanium, and indium-tin oxide (ITO) are widely used as 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
6
Table 1 
Summary of Common OMIECs for bioelectronics.   
Names and Abbreviations 
Molecular Structure 
Highlighted Properties 
Drawbacks 
References 
Summary 
of 
Common 
OMIECs 
Polythiophene (PT) 
• High conductivity (300 – 
400 S cm-1).  
• Not stable during 
n-doping (inject 
cation). 
[45] 
Poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) 
• High stability at p-doping 
and n-doping; high 
conductivity (300- 
500 S cm-1)  
• Lower specific 
capacitance 
(92 F g-1) 
[45,46] 
poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with 
poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) 
• Transparency, high 
electronic conductivity, 
volumetric capacity (C*), 
long-term stability, 
biocompatibility, and 
commercial-availability.  
• It is one of the most 
applied materials for 
bioelectronics.  
• Bulky structure of 
PSS dilutes PEDOT 
content (lower 
volume fraction).  
• Higher Young’s 
modulus (few 
hundred MPa) 
than most of the 
biological tissues 
(few KPa). 
[20,21,34, 
43,63] 
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with 
tosylate (PEDOT:TOS) 
• High in both µC* 
(126 F cm-1V-1s-1) and C* 
(~136 F cm-3) values;  
• Deposition by vapour- 
phase polymerization.  
• Conductivity improved by 
adding PEG.  
• Lack of more 
systematic studies 
for biological 
applications. 
[48,64] 
Polyaniline (PANI) 
• Two redox couples; High 
specific capacitance 
(530 F g-1).  
• Low conductivity 
(0.1 -5 S cm-1) and 
ageing process 
induced by O2. 
[50] 
Polypyrrole (PPy) 
• high volumetric 
capacitance (400- 
500 F cm-3).  
• Less stable 
(voltage > 0.3 V) 
[45,53,54] 
(continued on next page) 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
7
Table 1 (continued)  
Names and Abbreviations 
Molecular Structure 
Highlighted Properties 
Drawbacks 
References 
poly(3-methyl-thiophene), polyaniline, poly(2- 
(3,3’-bis(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy) 
ethoxy)-[2,2’-bithiophen]-5-yl)thieno[3,2-b] 
thiophene) (p(g2T-TT)) 
• High µC* value (228 F cm- 
1V-1s-1) with high mobility 
(0.9 cm2 V-1s-1) and C* 
(241 F cm-3).  
• Performance can be 
modified with side-chain 
engineering.  
• Lack of more 
systematic studies 
for biological 
applications. 
[7,48] 
poly((ethoxy)ethyl 2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy) 
ethoxy)acetate)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8- 
tetracarboxylic- diimide- co-3,3ʹʹ-bis(2-(2-(2- 
methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)- 
(bithiophene)) (p(gNDI-g2T)) 
• High C* value (397 F cm- 
3).  
• Tunable ionic capacitance 
by glycol side chain.  
• It has both n-type and p- 
type electronic 
transportation.  
• Low mobility (3 ×
10-4 cm2 V-1s-1) 
[65] 
(continued on next page) 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
8
Table 1 (continued)  
Names and Abbreviations 
Molecular Structure 
Highlighted Properties 
Drawbacks 
References 
Poly(N,N’-bis(7-glycol)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8- 
bis(dicarboximide)-co-2,2’-bithiophene-co-N, 
N’-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8- 
bis(bicarboximide)) (p-90) 
• µC* value is 3.43 ×10-2 
F cm-1V-1s-1, and C* value 
is 731 F cm-3.  
• It is an n-type material.  
• Capacitance and electron 
mobility are modified by 
side-chain engineering.  
• It has been applied for 
lactate, glucose sensing, 
and detection of 
supported lipid bilayer.  
• The figure of 
merits (such as 
µC* and C*) are 
lower than laddel- 
type polymer (eg. 
BBL). 
[56–60] 
Poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) 
(BBL) 
• High C* (930 F cm-3) and 
great properties of water 
can cation uptake.  
• It is an n-type material 
stable in ambient 
environment and aqueous 
electrolyte.  
• Slow response 
time due to slow 
ion diffusion into 
the material. 
[60,61]  
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
9
conductive tracks in OMEAs. Gold is more ductile and conductive, 
whereas ITO offers transparency [69]. Platinum has a higher Young’s 
modulus, providing better resistance to mechanical deformation, which 
could occur during the fabrication process or on a flexible device. 
The insulation layer is the coating made from electrically insulating 
material wrapping around the conductive tracks, preventing crosstalk in 
between tracks, and protecting the MEA circuitry from the external 
environment (humidity, oxidation, mechanical stress etc.). For inor­
ganic MEAs, in industry, encapsulation is performed with Silicon Nitride 
(Si3N4) [70]. Standard methods used to deposit Si3N4 encapsulation 
layers required plasma or high-temperature processes (250–400 ◦C) 
[71]. However, this is not suitable for OMIECs and would degrade the 
material performance. In the literature, there are three main types of 
insulating materials described which are dedicated to OMIEC: photo­
resists, PaC, and PDMS. Some examples of photoresists include SU8 from 
Microchem® [72], and DE1 from Orthogonal Inc. [73], which have 
dielectric properties that meet both expectations of biocompatibility 
and/or flexibility. Photoresists are promising as they provide insulation 
with only requiring one photolithography step, however, they are still 
under development to fit various applications of encapsulations [74]. 
PaC coatings are deposited to encapsulate conductive tracks via chem­
ical vapour deposition. It is also used to pattern OMIECs via a dry 
etching method [75]. PaC coating has chemical stability, excellent 
conformability over rough surfaces, transparency and hydrophobicity 
[9]. Lastly, PDMS has been proven to have excellent mechanical and 
thermal stability, as well as a relatively acceptable performance as an 
encapsulation layer in aqueous environments [76]. 
Finally, OMIECs comprising the electroactive sites of OMEAs are 
usually in direct contact with the biological system to record electro­
physiological activity. Their excellent properties have been previously 
discussed in Sections 1 and 2. Importantly, the mixed conduction 
properties of OMEAs are influenced by the deposition and patterning 
processes of OMIECs, which will be discussed and compared in the next 
two sections. 
3.1. OMIEC thin film deposition and formation 
The solution processability of OMIECs provides facile processing 
opportunities for OMEAs compared to silicon-based bioelectronics. 
Several solution processing techniques have been developed to date that 
are able to deposit uniform and functional OMIEC thin films. Depending 
on the desired bioelectronic application OMIECs can be deposited with 
the appropriate solution processing techniques and maintain their 
functional characteristics. Here, we select six solution processing 
methods of deposition that are most popular and important for OMEAs 
development as described in the following paragraphs and in Table 2. 
There are: Spin coating, spray coating, chemical vapour deposition 
(CVD), electrodeposition, inkjet printing, and doctor blading/bar 
coating. 
In spin coating (Table 2 row 1), the substrate is centred on a stage 
above a rotational axis, and a solution of OMIEC is poured over it. The 
spinning speed and the viscosity of the OMIEC dictate the thickness of 
the film. Thanks to the high-speed rotation of the substrate, a smooth 
and homogeneous coverage of the OMIEC film can be obtained. Nano­
metre to micrometre scaled thickness can be obtained depending on the 
viscosity, the amount of material dispensed, and the rotation speed of 
the stage. The roughness of the OMIEC can be controlled to a nanometre 
scale [77], as it shown in the example AFM image in Table 2 row 1 (b). 
However, the geometry of the substrate can influence the uniformity of 
the thickness due to the edge effect, so the inconsistency of film thick­
ness appears on the extremities of the substrate or on non-planar sur­
faces [78]. 
Spray coating is a method that spreads droplets of the OMIEC on top 
of the device, forming a layer of material by accumulation. The 
micrometre-sized drops coat the surface homogeneously and it theo­
retically uses less material than the spin-coating technique. This also 
offers a better homogeneity of coverage on edges and textured surfaces 
than is achievable via spin coating. Spray coating is believed to result in 
OMIEC films with increased surface roughness (Table 2 row 2 (b)) 
compared to spin coating. The solvent-evaporation rate during flight, 
droplet-propulsion speed, temperature and solvent concentration in the 
atmosphere are the four main parameters to consider when considering 
this technique for fabrication [78]. 
CVD is a technique that allows the formation of a thin film (uniform 
coating) over patterned surfaces. Some methods targeting PEDOT CVD 
deposition have been developed [79,80]. A thin film is formed via a 
thermal-induced chemical reaction at the substrate surface (Table 2 row 
3 (a)). Reagents present in their gaseous form in the environment will 
dissociate or chemically react upon heating, plasma, or light activation. 
However, this process is performed at high temperatures, so the device 
components, such as the substrate and insulation layer, could be 
damaged by the heat. 
Electrodeposition (Table 2 row 4) is a process that drives and de­
posits materials with an electric field onto a conductive substrate [81, 
82]. Electrodeposition [83] and electroplating [84] are two common 
names for this technique and are used interchangeably in the literature. 
This method coats the substrate by inducing a potential between a 
substrate (cathode) and an electrode (anode). The substrate and the 
anode are dipped in an electrolyte (ionic form of OMIEC) and a reaction 
occurs which results in the cathode being coated with OMIEC. This 
technique could also be considered a patterning method, because the 
patterning results occur on a pre-patterned conductive surface (e.g. 
metal) with defined openings for deposition created by the insulation 
layer (e.g. parylene or glass). 
Inkjet printing is a thin film deposition technique, which deposited 
OMIEC liquid drop-by-drop (Table 2 row 5). Since there is a controlled 
spatial resolution, it also achieves accurate patterning during the 
deposition. The patterning resolution will further be discussed in the 
next section (Section 3.2). There are many benefits of inkjet print for 
OMIEC, such as non-contacting processing, high efficiency for mass 
production, low-cost, low waste of printing materials, and selectablility 
of printing area [85,86]. Inkjet printing is a suitable technique for in­
dustrial fabrication, especially for biosensing and commercialized 
point-of-care applications. 
Lastly, bar coating and doctor blading are similar techniques (Table 2 
row 6). They both involve spreading excess amounts of material 
deposited on the substrate. While the former involves running a blade 
over the substrate, the latter uses a bar, which spreads the material on 
the surface. The gap between the tools and the substrate defines the 
thickness of the material deposition. These methods require a certain 
viscosity of the material, and a thickness of a few micrometres to a few 
hundred nanometres can be achieved [87,88]. Nevertheless, they are 
inexpensive methods and easy to process, so they appear frequently in 
research and industry. 
3.2. OMIEC micro-patterning techniques 
As shown in Fig. 3, generally two patterning approaches are followed 
for OMEAs: a) patterning techniques after OMIEC deposition - usually 
involves removing and deactivation of OMIEC material on specific 
patterns on the substrate surface (Section 3.2.1) and b) direct patterning 
techniques in which the OMIEC is directly patterned while being 
deposited on the device, at a precise location with the desired shape 
(Section 3.2.2). 
3.2.1. Patterning after deposition 
In this section, we will describe the three main methods used to 
pattern OMIEC after its deposition on the substrate: The etching, lift-off, 
and UV/laser techniques. To pattern OMIEC with etching or lift-off 
methods, photolithography is employed. It transfers patterns onto a 
photosensitive-polymer (photoresist)-coated layer via electron or light 
exposure through shadow masks. 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
10
Table 2 
Summary of solution processing techniques OMIECs deposition techniques (For each row, (a) is schematic of each technique, and (b) is morphology or characteristic of 
thin film deposited by each technique from literature).  
Techniques 
Characteristics of thin film 
Advantages 
Limitations 
Reference 
Spin coating 
• Ease of 
application for 
any solution- 
based polymer.  
• Large coverage 
on substrate 
area.  
• Reproducibility 
of surface 
characteristics.  
• Uniform 
thickness over 
planar 
substrates.  
• Ultra-thin layer 
coating.  
• Non-uniform 
coating 
occurring on 
non-planar and 
irregular sur­
faces of the 
substrate.  
• Inconsistent 
film thickness 
at the corners 
(ex. microscope 
glass slides) 
and edges of 
the substrate.  
• Large amount 
of material 
required and 
wasted. 
[77] 
Spray coating 
• Uniform 
coatings 
covering non- 
planar surfaces.  
• Low-cost 
technique.  
• Sidewalls 
(vertical 
surface) can be 
coated, but 
non-effects is 
found for lift- 
off patterning.  
• Material 
homogeneity 
required in 
solvent to 
obtain uniform 
surface. 
[77] 
(continued on next page) 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
11
Table 2 (continued) 
Techniques 
Characteristics of thin film 
Advantages 
Limitations 
Reference 
Chemical vapor 
deposition 
(CVD) 
• Higher 
conductivity 
and better 
conformity of 
thin OMIEC 
films.  
• Low porosity 
level.  
• Chemical 
bonding 
required on the 
substrate for 
adhesion.  
• Vacuum 
chamber 
required for 
deposition.  
• Process 
requires high 
temperature so 
that the 
temperature 
sensitive 
component of 
devices could 
be damaged.  
• Some 
monomers can 
be toxic and 
must be 
processed in 
controlled 
environment. 
[89] 
Electrodeposition 
• Excellent 
bonding to 
substrate 
material.  
• Coating of 3D 
structures in 
situ.  
• Cost effective.  
• Patterning with 
no post 
deposition 
treatment.  
• Requiring 
conducing 
substrates.  
• Time- 
consuming 
process.  
• Significant 
roughness 
occurred on the 
film. 
[90] 
(continued on next page) 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
12
The etching technique requires the OMIEC to be deposited before the 
photoresist. Since the photoresist is applied over the OMIECs, several 
requirements must be fulfilled: First, the resist, solvent, and developer 
used through photolithography steps should be chemically inert to the 
OMIECs. Second, the UV range applied over the device during exposition 
should not interfere with the OMIEC’s electrical and chemical proper­
ties. Third, the thermal baking of the resist should be at a temperature 
that the OMIEC can withstand. The etching technique generally is 
divided into two types: wet [94] (chemical) and dry [95,96] (plasma) 
etching. The wet etching is usually processed in liquid etchant and 
widely applied in silicon-based device fabrication. The etching rate is 
dictated by the crystal orientation of semiconductors. On the other hand, 
the dry etching dominating in organic conducting polymer patterning 
requires a plasma generator and gas-delivering system inside a chamber 
under vacuum [73,97]. Dry etching can be performed in two machines: 
reactive ion etching and ion beam etching. Reactive ion etching is based 
on chemical reactive plasma etching [96] The material is eroded by the 
combination of mechanical and chemical reactions from ionized gas in 
the chamber. Ion beam etching (milling machine), on the other hand, 
can remove material solely by physical bombardment, hence providing 
etch ability with a broad spectrum of materials including conducting 
polymers [98,99]. Etching techniques provide high-resolution and 
high-density patterns, but the material and gases used must also be 
chemically inert to the OMIEC. 
Table 2 (continued) 
Techniques 
Characteristics of thin film 
Advantages 
Limitations 
Reference 
Inkjet printing 
• Flexibility and 
stretchability of 
the layer.  
• Scalability for 
mass 
production.  
• Accuracy of 
patterning with 
resolution (20 – 
200 µm).  
• Tunable 
thickness by 
multilayer 
printing.  
• Drop-on- 
demand.  
• Printing 
resolution 
limited by 
droplet volume 
and wettability 
of ink on the 
substrate.  
• Roughness 
caused by 
printing 
artifacts 
[91,92] 
Doctor blading 
• Scalability.  
• Easy and rapid 
process.  
• Low material 
loss.  
• Uniformity of 
the deposition 
over large 
substrate.  
• Cost effective.  
• Creates 
relatively thick 
layers.  
• Particles 
contamination 
can induce 
defect and 
streaks on the 
film.  
• Thickness is 
less precise and 
controlled than 
other 
deposition 
techniques. 
[93]  
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
13
In contrast to etching, the lift-off technique creates a sacrificial layer 
before OMIEC deposition, and patterning is accomplished by mechani­
cally removing the sacrificial layer. In the case of organic patterning via 
the lift-off technique, two options are available: (1) patterning with a 
photoresist or (2) lifting off a patterned sacrificial layer [9,97]. For the 
first option, when dipped in the appropriate solvent, the resist is 
removed alongside the OMIEC deposited over it. This process will 
mainly fit uni-directional types of material deposition since the side­
walls of the resist pattern must not be covered to ensure a good lift of the 
material. This technique could be considered when the OMIEC used has 
poor adhesion with the substrate during performing the etching tech­
nique. Regarding the lift-off technique using a sacrificial layer, the 
OMIEC is deposited over the pre-patterned layer. Once stabilised, the 
sacrificial layer is peeled off manually, leaving only the OMIEC 
patterned on the device. A popular material to achieve the sacrificial 
layer lift-off technique is PaC. An anti-adhesive layer is deposited be­
tween the sacrificial layer (PaC) and the insulation layer so that the 
sacrificial layer can be easily peeled off [9]. The advantage of this 
technique is to avoid undesired chemical or thermal impact on the 
OMIEC caused by further processes since the lift-off patterning is the last 
step of device fabrication. 
Post-deposition patterning of OMIECs can also be achieved via, for 
example, UV or laser patterning, to directly deactivate the OMIEC 
conductivity or remove the OMIEC [100]. It has been shown as an 
alternative option to pattern an OMIEC film sensitive to specific wave­
lengths, resulting in increased resistance of thin films of materials [101]. 
This process allows patterning OMIEC by alternating its conductivity, 
which is different from material removal patterning. It is free from any 
etching step or resists patterning, thus preserving the OMIEC film’s 
chemical integrity. 
3.2.2. Direct patterning 
Direct patterning techniques accomplish the deposition of OMIEC 
films at specified areas and locations. Therefore, these techniques 
eliminate multiple patterning steps (such as photolithography, lift-off, 
and etching techniques). The most popular methods are electrodeposi­
tion, soft lithography, and printing/additive process or scanning-probe/ 
dip-pen printing. First of all, electrodeposition is both a deposition 
method (see Section 3.1) as well as a patterning technique. It provides in 
situ and cost-effective deposition results. However, this patterning 
technique is limited by the exposed area of conducting substrate within 
the electrolyte, so a pre-patterned insulation layer is important for 
defining the area of OMIEC deposition. 
Soft lithography is a technique based on printing/stamping with a 
soft elastomer (usually PDMS) pre-patterned through photolithography 
[102]. This low-cost technique is usually divided into subcategories, 
such as micro-contact, replica and solvent-assisted micromolding [103]. 
This is an easy-to-use technique, but the OMIEC needs a stronger 
adherence to the device surface than to the stamp material. Even though 
this technique can pattern OMIEC with features down to a few microns, 
it is limited by the alignment precision of the OMIEC layer onto the 
patterned CT layer. 
Printing/additive manufacturing rises as a reliable and widely used 
process in many different industries, notably in the microelectronics 
field [104,105]. Indeed, precision and critical dimension of resolution 
are previously restricting parameters for their use in microelectrode 
fabrication [106]. However, technical limitations have been overcome 
and new opportunities and capabilities are available in fabrication 
processes for microelectrodes. Stretchability, bioresorbability and con­
formability are now feasible through printing techniques for biosensors 
[107–109]. In addition, inkjet printing techniques are further enlarging 
their formulations to enable new material deposition such as organic 
inks [110,111]. The resolution is around 20–200 µm of the printed 
patterns, which are dictated by the volume of the droplet and the 
wettability of the liquid on the surface [86]. It is a fast and reproducible 
manufacturing process and it is extremely versatile in the choice of 
liquid form OMIEC. 
Lastly, dip-pen nanolithography is a direct printing-based technique 
Fig. 3. Summary of OMIEC layer patterning approaches.  
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
14
using AFM. Similar to nanoimprint, this patterning technique employs 
probes and tips of the AFM to deposit ink materials at nanoscale preci­
sion [112,113]. Similarly, scanning probe lithography patterns mate­
rials by using scanning probes, and can reach 10 nm feature precision. In 
contrast to the dip-pen technique, the scanning probe created an elec­
trochemical reaction at the surface of the OMIEC to change its structure 
by crosslinking the polymer over the substrate. These techniques pro­
vide very high-resolution patterns, but they are not scalable and quite 
time-consuming for patterning OMIEC for large or complicated areas. 
4. Applications 
OMEAs have been widely used for both in vivo and in vitro biological 
systems and used to either record or stimulate biological activity. As 
shown in Fig. 4, we classify in vivo OMEAs into two types: (1) deep- 
insertion OMEAs – i.e. devices that are designed to record/stimulate 
bioelectronic signals deep in the body and (2) surface conformable 
OMEAs – i.e. devices that are designed to record/stimulate bioelectronic 
signals from the surface of the organs. For in vitro applications, we 
categorize OMEAs based on the scale of biological events that can be 
detected. As shown in Fig. 4, that is as follows: 1) biosensors record 
events that happen at the protein/molecular level, 2) OMEAs designed 
to interface with cell membranes and biological events occurring at the 
nanoscale, 3) OMEAs designed to record signals from whole cell cultures 
or tissue slides in 2D and 4) Flexible OMEAs to interface with 3D cell 
cultures and organoids. 
4.1. OMEA for in vivo applications 
4.1.1. Deep-insertion OMEA probes 
Advances in OMEA technology for deep-brain stimulation and re­
cordings show great potential to provide treatment for neurological 
disorders, such as Parkinson’s, and epilepsy [114,115]. Bioelectronic 
treatment of these diseases are already known to be effective by using 
inorganic-based 
deep-insertion 
MEA 
technologies 
like 
the 
Michigan-style probes [116] and Utah arrays [117]. These commercially 
available probes are usually made with inorganic materials such as 
iridium and platinum active recording sites. While this technology has 
proven effective, traditional deep-insertion probes suffer long-term re­
cordings signal degradation because of “foreign body” responses from 
the immune cells around the probe, leading to the increased impedance 
at the interface with neurons [118]. 
In general, the foreign body response is complicated and can be 
caused by numerous factors. Taking neuronal probing as an example, 
blood-brain barrier breach, micromotion, disruption of glial networks, 
formation of the glial scar, and neuronal death are known biological 
failure mechanisms hindering long-term electrical recording [119]. 
Thanks to the biocompatible nature of the interfacing materials [120], 
reduction of surgical footprint [121,122], decreased device size, and 
increase in device flexibility [123–125] can be achieved with OMEAs. 
Fig. 4. OMEA applications are categorized based on their configurations: (a) in vivo applications: deep-insertion OMEA probe and surface conformable OMEAs; (b) 
in vitro applications based on rigid/flexible coplanar OMEAs. 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
15
Additionally, OMEAs show lower inflammatory response and provide 
longer-term and more accurate signals. Once the probe is inserted into 
brain tissue, an inflammatory response generally can quickly affect the 
recording sites by releasing proinflammatory factors and astrogliosis 
(forming a scar around the probe) [126]. The microglia and astrocytes 
populate around the recording sites increasing recording and stimula­
tion impedance. During this process, the resistance induced by these 
scars and dead/injured neurons forms an extra impedance layer that 
frustrates the voltage propagation to the recording electrodes. Accom­
panying this, the neuronal population is lost around the inserted probe, 
so the recording signal is weakened by the distance (Fig. 5a)) [118]. The 
Martin lab has demonstrated that probes with PEDOT-coated electrodes 
showed a drastic decrease in impedance at the recording site and 
increased the amplitude of the signal compared to the uncoated iridium 
electrode [120]. The PEDOT electrodes sustained longer-term (40 days) 
measurements through the whole immune response periods: initial 
trauma, early reactive response, and sustained immune response. After 
around 20 days, the PEDOT coated electrodes provided much higher 
SNR compared to uncoated ones. In addition, OMEA probes showed low 
impedance, high SNR, and high stimulation capacity, due to their unique 
mixed conduction properties (Section 1). 
Generally, the OMEA probe-brain recording systems are modelled 
with the equivalent circuit in Fig. 5(a) [127,128]. Ve usually is the 
biological voltage source, and Rspread is the resistance of the extracellular 
space (media) between the active cell and electrode. Re and Ce are 
electrode resistance and capacitance, which are related to the intrinsic 
properties of the polymer coating, and Rm is the resistance of metallic 
connections. In the case of neuronal stimulation, the same circuit ap­
plies. On one hand, a large electrode area can reduce the Rspread and 
increase Ce which is an advantage when detecting local field potentials 
(LFPs) for a population of neurons [128]. On the other hand, a smaller 
electrode has a larger Rspread and areal reduction of Ce. For smaller-size 
electrodes for tissue implantation, a high capacitance and low resistance 
OMIEC coating layer can still sustain high charge injection limits and 
avoid voltage drop at the interface, so OMEAs are excellent at recording 
a small number of cells. 
From the device-design perspective, minimizing the probe size and 
matching Young’s modulus of probe material with the tissue’s are the 
two direct paths to reduce inflammatory responses [122,128]. The 
Anikeeva group applied a thermal-drawn method to produce fibrous 
neuronal probes with a cross-sectional diameter for around a few hun­
dred micrometres (Fig. 5(d)). By selective etching of the cladding of the 
fibre, the fibre stiffness was greatly reduced to 5 N/m [124]. The brain 
implantation experiments showed that the foreign body responses, such 
as glial response and blood-brain-barrier (BBB) breach, was minimized, 
and two-month stable recordings were achieved. The thermal-drawn 
method can also be multifunctional by building in optical waveguides 
for optical stimulation and fluidic channels for drug delivery [124]. To 
bring Young’s modulus of the probe closer to that of tissue, the Malliaras 
group fabricated PEDOT:PSS devices on 4 µm parylene flexible substrate 
Fig. 5. Cellular immunoactivity between brain tissue and microelectrode: (a) astrocytes populating between neuron and electrode after probe insertion with an 
equivalent circuit model of between brain tissue the recording systems (Ve: biological voltage; Rspread: spreading resistance; Zscar: scar impedance; Re: electrode 
resistance; Ce: electrode capacitance; Rm: metal resistance) parallel to the physical structure [127]. (b) Inflammatory scar tissue was labelled by cell-specific-markers: 
inflammatory cells (ED1), astrocytes (GFAP), and neurons (NeuN) [118]. (c) 16-site and 4-shank Michigan-style probes with PEDOT film coated electrodes (darken) 
and iridium (shiny) electrodes [120]. (d) and (e) thermal-drawn fiberic probe: (d) The diameter changed during the thermal draw process; (e) the cross-sectional area 
of the multifunctional fibric probe with conductive polyethylene (CPE) electrodes and hollow core for chemical delivery (COC: cyclicolefin copolymer; PC: poly­
carbonate) [124]. (f) - (h) The layout and insertion process of substrate-delamination probe: (f) The layout of microelectrodes and OECTs; (g) The insertion step; (h) 
delamination and removal of the shuttle part. [123]. 
Reproduced with permission from [118,120,123,124,127](For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version 
of this article.). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
16
and implanted them into rat cortex with SU-8 shuttle. The shuttle was 
delaminated from the parylene substrate after implantation and there 
was no noticeable glial scar even after one-month implantation [123]. In 
parallel, the concept of “NeuroRoots”, developed by the Melosh team, 
consisted of multiple separated flexible electrodes [67,121]. The Neu­
roRoots were guided by microwire during implantation, and they 
delaminated from the microwire and remain in the brain for long-term 
measurements with high-density recording sites. Further, Woodington 
et al. developed shape actuating spinal cord arrays to reduce surgical 
invasiveness [129]. They adapted a flexible electrode array with fluidic 
channels so that the device size was minimized during implantation to 
the site of interest, and the coverage on the spinal cord was maximized 
after the actuation of the array triggered by the expansion of fluidic 
channels. Besides reducing probe size, matching material flexibility, and 
shape actuation, coating the electrode with bioactive molecules, such as 
extracellular matrix (ECM), has also been applied to improve biocom­
patibility [126]. ECM can greatly promote neuron attachment to the 
recording site and enhance the signal from the source. Even though 
these recent studies have shown that an OMIEC-coated electrode probe 
can significantly reduce the foreign body response and measure the 
brain activity with high signal quality, the tissue damage from the 
probing process can still be a significant side effect. 
4.1.2. Surface conformable OMEAs 
To minimize the inflammatory response that happens during deep- 
insertion recording, electrocorticography (ECoG) is a less invasive 
Fig. 6. The conformable OMEA applications: (a)-(b) NeuroGrid: structure of NeuroGrid conform on an orchid petal surface (scale bar, 100 mm); the insert shows the 
electrode array (scale bar, 100 µm); (b) NeuroGrid conforms on the surface of a rat somatosensory cortex (scale bar, 1 mm) [132]. (c)-(e) Anisotropic PEDOT 
composite coated soft electrodes: (c) image of two arrays bonded by PEDOT composite material (scale bar, 500 µm); (d) high-density array adhered on a human wrist 
for recording (scale bar, 10 mm); (e) The electromyography (EMG) and electrocardiography (ECG) signal recorded from wrist and biceps [133]. (f)-(h) Conformable 
brain probe printed by 3D printing techniques: (f) the schematic of printable PEDOT:PSS ink produced by lyophilization and re-dispersion in water-dimethyl 
sulfoxide (DMSO); (g) the whole structure of printed PEDOT:PSS array with PDMS printed as insulation layer (scale bar, 1 mm); (h) 3D printed neuron probe for 
rat brain recordings (scale bar 2 mm) [111]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [111,132,133] (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
17
method, with conformable OMEAs increasingly applied to monitoring 
the surface brain activities without damaging any tissue and providing 
real-time information before brain surgeries [130]. Besides the advan­
tages of the OMIEC coating described above, they are lightweight and 
can be easily adapted on substrates of different shapes and bendability. 
The features of these OMEAs rely on their thin and flexible organic 
substrate [68,131]. They are potentially capable to conform to the 
curvilinear surface of the brain, and even fit and attach to the brain sulci. 
Khodagholy et al. demonstrated a PEDOT:PSS microelectrode array 
fabricated on flexible parylene substrate (total thickness 4 µm) that was 
capable to record epileptiform sharp-waves. These devices also managed 
to detect and map out the same events with time-frequency analysis, 
which matched the recording from the silicon probes that had been 
inserted deep in the brain as a control [131]. Then, Khodagholy and 
colleagues further reported another conformable OMEA system, called 
“NeuroGrid”, which recorded local field (LFPs) and action potentials 
from surfaces of the hippocampal and cortex (Fig. 6(a)-(b)) [132]. The 
OMEA dimensions and density (i.e. 10 µm × 10 µm electrodes with 
30 µm spacing) were designed to specifically match the neural cell body 
size and density and they demonstrated that individual neurons are 
stably recorded over 10 days. Also, the LFP was monitored over a wide 
range of frequencies and was able to detect different animal movements 
and activities (e.g. Non-rapid eye movement sleep). 
While flexible devices are usually microfabricated in a cleanroom, 
recently Yuk et al. showed that high-quality flexible devices can be 
produced with printing techniques. The development of 3D printed 
PEDOT:PSS flexible electrodes for in vivo rate brain recording were 
performed to successfully pick up LFP, continuous action potential, and 
single unit potentials [111]. This 3D printing technique is promising for 
the mass production and commercialisation of these OMIEC-based 
probes in the future. 
Besides in vivo recording, flexible OMEA arrays are also capable of 
health monitoring and recording from the skin. Recently, Jastrzebsk- 
Perfect et al. developed flexible MEA from PEDOT:PSS particles and 
chitosan polymer composites with anisotropic electric resistance [133]. 
These devices can interface with human skin and conduct electrocar­
diography (ECG) and electromyography (EMG) with high spatiotem­
poral resolution. All the above-mentioned studies have revealed the 
potential of OMEAs technologies to tackle major challenges in health­
care, particully disease diagnosis and treatments related to the brain and 
neuronal tissue. 
4.2. OMEAs for in vitro applications 
OMEAs have been used for many different in vitro applications, 
spanning from subcellular components such as metabolites and lipid 
bilayers to whole cell cultures and organoids. The following section 
describes these in vitro applications in detail and gives representative 
examples of recently published literature. The ability of OMIEC to be 
solution-processed, and chemically functionalized are features that 
show great potential to further expand the use of OMEAs in numerous in 
vitro bioelectronic applications with high specificity and sensitivity. 
4.2.1. OMEAs for biosensing 
Enzymatic detection of metabolites and biomolecules from body 
fluids is one of the most common applications of coplanar OMEAs. 
Generally, the detection mechanism is based on sensing the redox cur­
rent generated by the metabolite-enzyme redox reaction. Usually, the 
enzyme is directly incubated on the surface of OMEAs and covalently 
bound on the surface of OMIECs. Cathodic or anodic peaks of cyclic 
voltammograms are used to quantitatively measure the concentration of 
metabolites of interest. Biosensors based on OMIECs are explained in 
detail in other recent reviews, i.e. Pappa et al. Pitsalidis et al., and Koklu 
et al. [26,134,135]. 
Glucose detection still dominates the market and research fields of 
metabolite biosensing [26,135,136]. Therefore, the development of 
glucose sensing with OMEA can be illustrated as a model case here. 
Glucose oxidase (GOx) is an enzyme which can oxidize glucose into 
gluconolactone by accepting two electrons and yielding hydrogen 
peroxide (Fig. 7(a)) [137]. GOx-base sensors are designed by detecting 
either hydrogen peroxide or redox current. However, in the case of 
hydrogen peroxide, production is very low and the contribution to an 
electric signal (in the order of 5 −10%) is negligible. Therefore, sensing 
hydrogen peroxide production is not a preferred detection mechanism 
for glucose sensing [137]. OMEAs have been used to sense glucose 
concentrations through redox current as the dominant mechanism 
(Fig. 7(a)-(c)). A mediator is sometimes used to promote the electron 
transfer between the enzyme and electrode surface [26]. Thanks to the 
excellent electron transport properties of OMIECs, and covalent bonds 
with enzymes, direct electron transport between the enzyme redox 
centre and the OMIEC is possible without the use of a mediator [57]. 
Kros and coworkers showed that once GOx was directly incorporated 
with a PEDOT-based surface, the redox current can be directly trans­
ported to the PEDOT layer [137]. Later, Wang et al. demonstrated that 
ferrocene bound to a mixture of polyethylenimine nanobead (BPEI-Fc) 
and GOx, coated on PEDOT:PSS-carbon electrode, had very high glucose 
sensitivity (66 µA mM-1 cm-2) comparing to many other types of sensors 
(Fig. 7(b)) [138]. In addition, enzyme-based organic-electrode sensors 
are promising candidates as low-cost, disposable, and eco-friendly 
point-of-care devices. Although single devices can be used in bio­
sensing, the prospect of electrode array configuration allows the per­
formance of replicates with accompanying statistical analysis, an 
essential part of biological sensing where variability could be high. Bihar 
et al. demonstrated glucose-sensing electrodes that were entirely made 
with the inkjet-printing method onto a paper substrate (Fig. 7(c)) [139]. 
This device excibited high sensitivity of glucose detection in a wide 
range of concentrations, and it was able to distinguishing non-diabetic 
from diabetic saliva [139]. Besides glucose, other metabolites, such as 
creatinine [140], ascorbic acid [141], dopamine [141], uric acid [141], 
and many more were also sensed based on their unique redox activities 
(sensed by CV or differential pulse voltammogram), which attracting 
great interest within the field of enzyme-based OMEA sensing. Overall, 
the high-electronic transport, intimate incorporation with enzymes, and 
low fabrication cost are all important factors making enzyme-based 
OMEAs sensors powerful and promising tools for future point-of-care 
technologies. 
4.2.2. OMEAs for cell membranes-on-a-chip 
The cell membrane, as the outermost barrier of individual cells, 
functions as a first defensive screen, nutrient selector, and supplier, 
which maintains a stable intracellular environment. Cell-membranes- 
on-chip is recently becoming a popular topic in bioelectronics [142]. 
Researchers have investigated the impedance properties of the native 
cell membrane with OMEAs. Liu et al. demonstrated that supported lipid 
bilayer (SLB) from mammalian cells were reconstructed on the PEDOT: 
PSS electrode which in turn sensed the impedance increase compare to 
the bare electrodes, using EIS measurements [143]. They managed to 
read out the impedance reduction caused by opening the ATP-gated 
PX2P-ion channel on the baby hamster kidney (BHK) membrane with 
the membrane-on-microelectrode system [143]. The native membrane 
fused microelectrode can be simulated with an equivalent circuit shown 
in Fig. 8(a). The Cm and Rm in parallel represent the membrane resis­
tance and capacitance, respectively, and the Re is the electrolyte resis­
tance above the microelectrode, and Cp is the capacitance of PEDOT:PSS 
coating [143,144]. With this equivalent circuit model, the membrane 
impedance characteristics Cm and Rm can be extracted [143,144]. 
Lu et al. highlighted and compared characteristic impedance profiles 
between native and all-lipid (synthetic) membranes [145]. Generally, 
the native membranes show lower membrane resistance compared to 
the all-lipid membrane. Also, they show the electrode design trade-off 
for optimum SLB sensitivity. Further, Pappa and colleagues demon­
strated that ion channel activation and deactivation could be monitored 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
18
with EIS measurements. On the human embryonic kidney (HEK) mem­
brane, the TREK-1 potassium ion channels were overexpressed 
throughout the membrane, so when arachidonic acid (AA, a TREK-1 
activation molecule) was added, it induced the ion flow through the 
membrane and the membrane impedance has a large drop (97% 
decrease) [144]. Spadin, a TREK-1 blocker, suppressed the ion current 
and caused the rising of membrane impedance. This system of 
membrane-on-OMEA can be an alternative technique to avoid the lim­
itation of both low throughput of ion-channel activity monitoring and 
cell viability maintenance from traditional ion channel monitoring 
methods (i.e., patch clamp). Further, this system also has been adapted 
for the detection of virus entry process [146]. Baby hamster kidney 
(BHK) and African green monkey kidney (Vero E6) with sialic acid (SA) 
receptor expression were integrated onto PEDOT:PSS electrodes (Fig. 8 
(i)-(k)). Since X-31 HA proteins from the influenza virus are the specific 
binding protein to SA receptors and involve in the invasion process, the 
significant increase of resistive feature of impedance spectra with 
OMEAs indicates the fusion into the host cell membrane. 
4.2.3. OMEAs for cell culture 
Similar to in vivo recording from brains, electroactive cell or tissue 
slides can be recorded by rigid coplanar OMEAs in a standard culture 
environment. Rigid OMEAs as an in vitro tool has been much investi­
gated for drug discovery and toxicology. Sessolo et al. fabricate OMEA 
with the “parylene lift-off” method and successfully detects LFP and 
action potentials from slices of rat hippocampus with low noise 
( ± 10 µV peak-to-peak) [9]. Taking advantage of the glass substrate, 
the recording site of each electrode was positioned with an optical mi­
croscope (Fig. 9(h)). This proved to be a powerful tool to spot the origin 
of abnormal firing (i.e., epilepsy). However, there are two limitations of 
tissue slice recording. The first is that the presence of a layer of dead or 
injured cells act as an insulator and reduces the recording signals [9]. 
The second limitation is that the slice only can stay active for a short 
time period, so the long-term study could not be carried out. Therefore, 
culturing electroactive cells on OMEAs is a simplified, low-cost, and 
animal-free approach to mimic the in vivo conditions. 
The first neuronal culture recording with coplanar Pt MEAs was re­
ported by Pine in 1980 [151]. OMEAs show improved recording per­
formance, i.e. higher SNR, as a result of the lower impedance of the 
OMIEC coating compared to flat metals (Section 2.3). To have a 
high-quality recording, a few challenges need to be considered. The first 
one is the cell viability of OMEA in the cell-culture environment. 
Richardson-Burns et al. manage to record SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells 
with PEDOT:PSS microelectrodes [148]. The electrochemical polymer­
ization was applied to coat PEDOT:PSS film onto the metal electrodes 
with the presence of SH-SY5Y cells, and the cells covered fully or 
partially with PEDOT:PSS were able to maintain 82% viability over 72 h 
(Fig. 9(e)) [148]. This further confirmed the excellent biocompatibility 
of PEDOT:PSS for cell culture. In the same work, CV and EIS were used to 
sense the attachment of cells onto the electrodes by identifying 
decreased anode/cathode current and detecting higher impedance, 
respectively. The second challenge is the maintenance of mature neu­
rons since they do not undergo cell division. Pas et al. successfully 
co-culture neurons and astrocytes on polypeptide (poly-D-lysine) and 
extracellular matrix (laminin) coated OMEAs and found that high cell 
density on the PEDOT:PSS MEAs drastically improved the recorded 
voltage amplitude due to the more neurons being closer to the electrode 
sites (Fig. 9(c)) [147]. They improve the single-unit recording by 
Fig. 7. Biosensing with OMEAs: (a) The redox reaction series of the sensing mechanism; (b) the structure of PEDOT:PSS-carbon electrode with a mixture of pol­
yethylenimine nanobead (BPEI-Fc) and GOx [138]. (c) glucose-sensing CV curves with ink-jet-printed PEDOT:PSS electrode under four different measurement 
conditions (black line: before PEDOT:PSS deposition; red line: PEDOT:PSS electrode measured in PBS; blue and yellow lines are measuring with 1 mM and 10 mM 
glucose present; the insert is the electrode structure). Reproduced with permission [139]. (d) Differential pulse voltammogram of ascorbic acid (AA), dopamine 
(Dop), and uric acid (UA) show high selectivity at −
40, 150 and 280 mV with electropolymerized PEDOT microelectrodes [141]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [138,139,141] (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
19
Fig. 8. The EIS measurement for the membrane-on-OMEA system: (a) A scheme of forming native (HEK) and all-lipid (DOPC:DOTAP) membrane on PEDOT:PSS 
coated microelectrode with equivalent circuit model, and each circuit element representing the physical element in the system [145]. (b) Comparing native and 
all-lipid membrane impedance profile with Bode plot. (c) A scheme of opening and closing the TREK-1 ion channels HEK-TREK-1 membrane on with AA and spadin, 
respectively; (b) spadin (10 µM) addition suppressing the TREK1 activity inducing an increase of membrane resistance; (d) AA activating TREK1 causing a decrease of 
normalized membrane resistance [144]. (f) schematic of PX2X ATP-gated ion channel; (g) Nyquist plot of a bare electrode (black), P2X2-rich membrane, and 
membrane treated with ATP (blue); (h) Membrane impedance of baby hamster kidney (BHK) membrane expressing P2X2-ion have more significant decrease when it 
is treated with ATP channel comparing with normal BHK membrane [143]. (i)-(k) Monitoring influenza virus fusion onto to native membrane with the expression of 
sialic acid receptor: (i) schematic of virus fusion process; Bode plot for detection of virus fusion results: (j) on BHK SLB; (k) on Vero SLB [146]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [143–146](For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.) 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
20
culturing 3D neurospheres formed from rat primary cortical cells, which 
gave much higher local cell density. The third challenge for recording 
neural cells is to create cell-growth preferential surfaces on top of 
electrodes according to electrode dimensions and arrangement so that 
the cells can migrate on top of the electrode site and grow with neigh­
bouring cells in a controlled manner. Pas et al. then further patterned the 
OMEA with polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA, a cell-attachment 
inhibitor) with a laser writing technique and managed to measure 
multi-neuron recording with a single electrode from neurospheres for 
the first time [147]. Besides neuronal recording, researchers also stim­
ulated cells with OMEAs. Dijk and colleagues stimulated glioblastoma 
cells with PEDOT:PSS electrodes, and concluded that the thicker PEDOT: 
PSS coating could reduce impedance and increase charge injection, and 
the optimal thickness (650 nm) provided a much longer electrode life­
time, which could be beneficial for long-term stimulation [40]. 
Furthermore, to mimic and stimulate neuron growth in native condi­
tions, Tomaskovic et al. cultured human neuronal stem cells (hNSCs) 
within a biogel to imitate native 3D cell growth conditions [149]. They 
direct-write print the PEDOT:PSS into pillar electrodes, so these 
3D-pillar electrodes improved the stimulation by closer coupling with 
cells. The hNSC stimulated by 3D-electrode showed higher density of 
mature neuronal network compared with the counterpart without 
stimulation. These OMEAs have already shown stable and long-term 
recording and stimulation abilities, and soon, their advantages of 
versatility and biocompatibility could play a crucial role in the field of 
cell culture, differentiation, and tissue regeneration. 
OMEAs are not only a device for electroactive cell measurements, but 
also a powerful tool to sense the barrier effect of cell layers. Epithelial 
and endothelial cells can form selective layers to maintain stable 
chemical environments within organisms [152]. Connected by tight 
junctions (TJ), these barrier cells are capable of controlling the transport 
of molecules (including ions) that pass through the barrier [152]. These 
barrier monolayers are common but crucial due to their physiological 
function, so the integrity of their barrier monolayer is an indicator of 
disease. The barrier effect of these monolayers can be evaluated by EIS. 
Monolayers formed by Caco-2 cells and Madin Darby canine kidney 
(MDCK) cells are typically used as cell models within the field [153, 
154]. The barrier monolayer can be cultured on the filter of a Trans­
well® above the OMEA, which mimics the lumen and basolateral do­
mains by the top and bottom media chambers (Fig. 9(b)). Once cells are 
confluent on the filter, the TJ can form intercellularly, so the cell layer 
creates a barrier to inhibit the ionic flow and influence the impedance 
spectra [150,155,156]. 
When AC voltage sweeps through mid-frequencies, the cell mono­
layer characteristics can be measured. Taking Caco-2 monolayers as an 
example, the frequency from 1 to 102 Hz explores the resistance effect of 
the paracellular pathway (between the cells), whereas, at the higher 
frequency (102 – 103 Hz), the current provides the capacitance charac­
teristics of the transcellular pathway (through the cells) (Fig. 9(j)) [25, 
150,152]. Furthermore, the cell monolayer and Transwell® OMEAs are 
commonly modelled with the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 9(i). RMEM 
is the tight junction resistance between cells, and CMEM is the capaci­
tance element that contributed to the cell. RS and CEL are electrolyte 
impedance and electrode capacitance, respectively [150]. Through this 
equivalent circuit model, the impedance (capacitive and resistive) 
properties of the cell monolayer can be extracted through the fitting of 
the impedance spectra. However, according to the work by Koutsouras 
et al., the barrier cell-impedance characteristic could only be sensed by 
Fig. 9. Comparison of direct culture and Transwell® culture configuration of OMEAs: (a) Scheme of electroactive cells directly cultured on the rigid coplanar device 
for recording and stimulation; (b) scheme of seeding barrier cell layer onto Transwell® MEAs for impedance characterisation; (c)-(h) various type of electroactive cell 
or tissue system on chip: (c) neurosphere recording (PEGDA (blue dashed band) patterns with showing neuron (MAP2, green), astrocytes (GFAP, orange), cell nuclei 
(bisbenzimide, blue)) [147]. (d) cortico-hippocampal network recording (scale bar: 100 µm) [66]. (e) PEDOT encapsulation SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma. [148]. (f) 
glioblastoma stimulation [40]. (g) neural stem cell 3D stimulation with pillar electrode array [149]. (h) brain slice recording coplanar MEA with 400 µm2 electrode 
surface area [9]. (i)-(k) The barrier effect of cell monolayer with EIS measurements: (i) the equivalent circuit model of cell monolayer on Transwell® membrane of 
MEAs; (j) the impedance regimes of each equivalent circuit element represented in Bode plot; (k) sensing regime and non-sensing regime separated with impedance 
spectra of specific electrode area (red curve) where |Zelectrode| is equal to the |Zcell| [150]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [9,40,66,148–150] (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
21
relatively large electrodes (5000 µm × 5000 µm and 10,000 µm × 10, 
000 µm). Essentially, the sensitivity is due to the ratio of the impedance 
modulus of the cell barrier (|Zcell|) to the impedance modulus (|Zelec­
trode|) of the electrode (Fig. 9(k)). On one hand, when the |Zelectrode| is 
greater than the |Zcell|, the system is in the non-sensing regime, so the 
electrode cannot pick up any impedance signals from the cells. On the 
other hand, when the |Zcell| is greater than |Zelectrode|, the electrode can 
sense the cell-barrier impedance, which is noticeable both in the Bode 
plot (Fig. 9(j) and (k)). Therefore, the size of the electrode is a very 
crucial parameter for designing sensitive microelectrodes for various 
biological applications. 
Further, adapting optical measurement through the monitoring 
electrodes recently has been achieved on OMEAs, which is becoming a 
more comprehensive way of studying biological activities correlating 
with electronic measurements. Transparent MEAs have been fabricated 
with ITO or graphene providing 80% and more than 90% transparency, 
respectively, but the impedances of these electrodes are much higher 
(~200 kΩ at 1k Hz with 30 µm electrode diameter) [157]. However, 
thin film PEDOT:PSS electrodes have the advantages of both trans­
parency for optical imaging and still maintaining low impedance (40 kΩ 
at 1k Hz with 30 µm electrode diameter), so they maintain a high SNR 
ratio for neuron recordings. Susloparova et al. demonstrated successful 
recording of rate cortical recording over 4 weeks [157]. 
As shown in Fig. 10 (b), the impedance properties of transparent 
PEDOT:PSS electrodes are similar to PEDOT:PSS coated gold electrodes 
and have much lower impedance spectra compared to the metal (Au) 
electrodes. The key parameter to optimize for this kind of electrode is 
adjusting the thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer. The lower thickness of 
PEDOT:PSS gives a higher transparency for imaging but a higher 
impedance of the electrodes. Middya et al. demonstrated that the 
385 nm thickness was the optimized value to maintain low impedance 
and have around 75% transparency for the visible spectra [158]. They 
further demonstrated that using structured illumination spectroscopy 
(SIM) to visualise high-resolution images of β III tubulin and bassoon 
presence on cortical neurons through PEDOT:PSS electrodes in parallel 
with neuronal recordings (Fig. 10 (c) and (f)-(g)). 
Moreover, taking the advantage of flexible substrates, OMEAs can be 
used to conform with the tissue surface or embrace the cells to stimu­
late/monitor the electrophysiological activities. For example, Kalmykov 
et al. fabricated self-rolled MEAs by mismatching the residual stress 
between the bottom and top layer of SU-8 photoresist; these devices 
encapsulated a single human cardiac spheroid and maintain their 
viability [159]. The self-rolling-encapsulation process even provided a 
3D mapping of single field potential propagation across the spheroid. 
Besides monitoring the electrophysiological activities from the surface 
of tissues, the OMEAs can be fabricated into meshes or scaffolds to 
co-culture with cells and record their activity from an adjacent distance. 
Liu group developed the “cyborg organoid” system, which integrated 
stretchable mesh electronics with 3D organoid [160]. The co-cultured 
stem cells are differentiated into functional cells such as car­
diomyocytes and mesh electronics are uniformly distributed in orga­
noids after more than one month of culture. The electrical activity 
during the differentiation process was monitored through microelec­
trodes built into the mesh. Moreover, Wang and colleagues demon­
strated a 3D electronic scaffold by compressively bulking 2D MEA mesh 
(Fig. 11 (e)-(g)) [161]. The microelectrodes were distributed on the 3D 
scaffold and immersed in hydrogel with high molecule permeability, so 
when the cardiomyocytes are cultured within the hydrogel, the elec­
trodes were able to stimulate and monitor the cardiomyocyte activity 
over 14 days. Furthermore, negatively charged small drug molecules 
(ex. dexamethasone) were able to be incorporated with pyrrole through 
an oxidation process and released by a reduction reaction. In summary, 
these flexible OMEAs have provide intimate recording sites with the 
tissue/cell and are maintained in a 3D environment. These electrical 
recordings in a 3D environment are very useful in the field of tissue 
engineering and drug discovery since they represent more realistic 
biological models compared with 2D. 
Fig. 10. Optical monitoring cells through transparent microelectrodes: (a) schematic of optical imaging through transparent OMEAs. (b) Comparison of impedance 
spectra of gold (black), transparent PEDOT:PSS (green), PEDOT:PSS coated gold (magenta) electrodes (scale bar: 50 µm). (c) Multiple waveforms of spikes detected 
from transparent PEDOT:PSS electrode from (b); the red curve shows the average values of the spikes. (d)-(e) Transparent electrode for cortical cells recording: (d) 
the device dimensions; (e) live-imaging of neurons on a single electrode (scale bar: 20 µm) [157]. (f)-(g) the optical monitoring on the same area of a primary cortical 
cell through transparent PEDOT:PSS electrode in (b): (f) bright field imaging through different material layers (scale bar: 50 µm); (g) SIM imaging with stained β III 
tubulin (purple) and bassoon (green) (the dashed lines are the borderline separating the layers of material imaged through. scale bar: 50 µm) [158]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [157,158] (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
22
4.3. OMEAs for optical stimulation 
A new category of organic electrode is emerging as a powerful tool 
for the wireless stimulation of tissue. Optically active OMIECs that can 
be powered by light are used to stimulate neurons, and other cells, in 
close proximity. The key structure of these electrodes is the organic 
metal-p-n junction. Usually, a layer of metal-free phthalocyanine (H2PC) 
is used as light absorbing and p-type electron donor layer, whereas an 
adjacent layer of N,N’-dimethyl 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic dii­
mide (PTCDI) work as an n-type electron-acceptor (Fig. 12 (b)). [162] 
The transparent metal (or ITO) is directly contacting H2PC, and PTCDI is 
directly facing the electrolyte. When light is used to illuminate the p-n 
junction, generated charges (i.e electrons and holes) are transported 
through the films and reach the interface with electrolytes. Electrons are 
excited to a free state within H2PC, so that the n-type electron acceptor, 
PTCDI, transports electrons to the interface of PTCDI and electrolyte. 
Holes are generated within H2PC (i.e. the p-type material) and are 
transported to the transparent conductors (ie transparent Au or ITO). 
Under illumination, cations within the electrolyte and electrons are 
capacitively coupled at the electrolyte-n-type-material interface. As 
such, these photosensitive electrodes are also known as organic elec­
trolytic photocapcitors (OEPC). The transniet ionic displacement of 
cation at the electrolyte interface with the OMIEC creates a change in the 
membrane potential of cells and stimulates them [163]. Other than the 
photocapitive displacement mechanism, photo-faradiac processes as 
well as photo-thermal effects are also found to stimulate cells in close 
Fig. 11. Flexible OMEAs for in vitro applications: (a)-(b) self-roll 3D-recording OMEA array: (a) the self-roll mechanism, (scale bar: 100 µm); (b) confocal image of 
OMEA array wrapping around cardiac spheroid recording (scale bar: 50 µm) [159]. (c)-(d) stretchable mesh nanoelectronics: (c) the layout of mesh nanoelectronics 
(the inserted image is a PEDOT-coated electrode); (d) a cyborg organoid with uniform distribution of the devices over the organoid [160]. (e)-(g) 3D electronic 
scaffold: (e) free-standing 3D electronic scaffold in hydrogel (scale bar: 1 cm); (f) electrodes of 3D electronic scaffold (scale bar: 200 µm); (g) one electrode embedded 
within cardiac tissue (scale bar: 100 µm. Dash line: electrode location; red: sarcomeric actinin; blue: nuclei) [161]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [159–161](For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
23
proximity. A detailed explanation of photo-stimulation mechanisms 
using OMIECs is reported in recent reviews [55,164]. The photo-charge 
generation and transport are described in Fig. 12(d), and blue and red 
arrows represent the capacitive and faradic currents, respectively. 
Furthermore, to describe the photoelectric process and carrier 
transport within OEPC, the whole system can be described as the model 
circuit in Fig. 12 (a). The voltage source Vp represents the photovoltage 
from the p-n junction during illumination, and the electronic carrier 
transport within n-type and p-type semiconductors can be described as 
Ren and Rep, respectively. The ionic movement within the electrolyte is 
modelled by a resistor, Ri, and the electron-ion compensation at the 
interface is modelled as a double-layer capacitor, Cdl. Also, the non- 
linear Faradic current is described as current in parallel with Cdl. 
Lastly, the Cg is in parallel with the rest of the circuit for mimicking the 
geometric capacitance of the semiconductor layer. 
OEPC has been used in some neuron stimulation applications. Rand 
and colleagues first fabricated OEPC arrays that are capable of photo- 
stimulating neuronal cells. Then, they directly cultured and stimulated 
retinal 
ganglion 
cells 
(RGCs) 
for 
3 
weeks 
[163]. 
During 
photo-stimulation, commercial MEAs are also used to record the elec­
trical activities from RGCs. They demonstrated the intensity of 
neuro-response was manipulated by variation of light intensities (Fig. 12 
(g)). Recently, Ejneby et al. built a single OEPC on thin parylene film 
with “zip-tie” mechanism, so it can be implanted and wraped around the 
Fig. 12. The structure and applications of organic electrolytic photocapacitor (OEPC): (a) the model circuit of OEPC; (b) A schematic of the structure of OEPC; (c) the 
molecular structure of p-type material (H2PC) as a primary light-absorbing layer and electron-donor (blue) and PTCDI as n-type electron-acceptor; (d) Energy band 
diagram showing metal-n-p junction and carrier transport during light stimulation (black arrow: electron transport; red arrow: Faradic current; blue arrow: capacitive 
current) [162,165]. (e)-(g) Stimulation of a piece of retina micro-size OEPC array (showing one device here): (e) schematic of cytoplasm direct contact with a single 
OEPC; (f) optical image of retina placed on OEPC with focus on the neuron fibre layer; (g) electrical recording under 5 ms light pulse with a variation of light intensity 
[163]. (h) zip-tie OEPC is implanted for rate sciatic nerve stimulation. The top insert is showing the unwrapped architecture of the device. The bottom insert is a 
1 mm diameter OEPC wrap around the sciatic nerve (scale bar: 1 mm). (i)-(j) OEPCs for mouse somatosensory cortex stimulation: (i) schematic of the concept of light 
stimulation with OEPC implant location on the mouse brain. Top inset: the layout of the OEPCs with and without extra PEDOT:PSS coating. Bottom inset: planar 
OEPC implanted on mouse cortex. (j) Stimulation artefact amplitudes are decreased by adding an extra coating of PEDOT:PSS coating when the devices are illu­
minated directly on the cortex, skull, and skin [166]. 
Reproduced with permission from: [162,163,165,166] (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.). 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
24
sciatic nerve in vivo [165]. They applied deep-red light to penetrate 
through 10 mm skin-fat-muscle layers and excited OEPC for 103 days of 
nerve stimulation. Furthermore, Missey et al. implanted OEPC into the 
mouse cortex above the barrel motor to evoke whisker movement [166]. 
They compared stimulation artifact amplitude with three protocols of 
applying 638 nm light directly on the cortex, through bone, and through 
skin and bone. The thicker the tissue that light penetrated through, the 
lower the stimulation artefact amplitudes. They reported an extra layer 
of PEDOT:PSS coating on OEPC improved the performance by signifi­
cantly reducing the stimulation artefact amplitudes (Fig. 12(i)-(j)). 
Recently, OEPCs are catching much attention within the field of bio­
electronics for their excellent photoelectric properties, and related 
research is facilitating wireless electronics for neuronal stimulation. 
5. Discussion and outlook 
The recent rapid advances in OMEA development truly demonstrate 
their capacity as implantable health monitoring devices, in vitro diag­
nostic sensors, tissue-on-chip models and more. For further advance­
ments in the field, there are a few points of view worth considering. 
Firstly, to reduce the conductive track resistance and fabrication diffi­
culties, most of the conductive track design needs to keep a reasonable 
width and proper arrangement around the working electrode areas 
within the same plane. Thus, the conductive track occupancy may limit 
the packing density and deduction of the electrode sizes. The ideal 
separation of wiring and functional electrode into two (multi-) planes 
adapted from matrix technology might give more room to arrange a 
denser array-packing [167,168]. Also, other types of devices, such as 
microfluidic channels, can be integrated with organic bioelectronics to 
expand the functionalities. Microfluidic channels can provide controlled 
delivery of reagents to sensing sites and a sequenced readout can be 
conducted through a linear array [169]. There are many excellent 
fundamental and applied studies on OMEA technology, and commer­
cialization seems to be the next and logical step. To develop OMEAs into 
a more accessible platform, multiplexed monitoring, wireless 
patient-machine interface, and automation of measurements are the 
aspects for further development of this technology. Last but not least, the 
ongoing and increasing amount of collaborations among material 
chemists, device engineers, and biological/medical researchers all over 
the world should be highly encouraged to make OMEAs more powerful 
and promising tools to study biological events and combat diseases. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Roisin M. Owens reports financial support was provided by University of 
Cambridge. Roisin M. Owens reports a relationship with University of 
Cambridge that includes: employment. 
Data Availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
Acknowledgements 
ZL would like to thank Sarah L. Barron for proofreading this paper 
and Dr Alexander J. Boys for the literature suggestions on the aspect of 
foreign body responses of implantable devices. A.S. acknowledges 
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and inno­
vation program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant, MultiStem 
(No. 895801) 
References 
[1] J. Rivnay, R.M. Owens, G.G. Malliaras, The rise of organic bioelectronics, Chem. 
Mater. 26 (2014) 679–685, https://doi.org/10.1021/cm4022003. 
[2] E. Dornberger, D. Gr¨af, M. Suhren, U. Lambert, P. Wagner, F. Dupret, W. Von 
Ammon, Influence of boron concentration on the oxidation-induced stacking fault 
ring in czochralski silicon crystals, J. Cryst. Growth 180 (1997) 343–352, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0248(97)00270-4. 
[3] E.F. Schubert, Doping in III-V Semiconductors - E. Fred Schubert, New York, 
1993. 〈https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Y6xhCgAAQBAJ&printsec=fron 
tcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false〉(accessed 
April 28, 2020). 
[4] D. Callister, William; rethwisch. Materials science and Engineering: An 
Introduction, nineth ed., Wiley, New York, 2013. 
[5] A. Savva, C. Cendra, A. Giugni, B. Torre, J. Surgailis, D. Ohayon, A. Giovannitti, 
I. McCulloch, E. Di Fabrizio, A. Salleo, J. Rivnay, S. Inal, Influence of water on the 
performance of organic electrochemical transistors, Chem. Mater. 31 (2019) 
927–937, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b04335. 
[6] C. Cendra, A. Giovannitti, A. Savva, V. Venkatraman, I. McCulloch, A. Salleo, 
S. Inal, J. Rivnay, Role of the anion on the transport and structure of organic 
mixed conductors, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2019) 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adfm.201807034. 
[7] A. Giovannitti, D.T. Sbircea, S. Inal, C.B. Nielsen, E. Bandiello, D.A. Hanifi, M. 
Sessolo, G.G. Malliaras, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, Controlling the mode of 
operation of organic transistors through side-chain engineering, Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U. S. A. 113 (2016) 12017–12022. 〈https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1608780 
113〉. 
[8] C.B. Nielsen, A. Giovannitti, D.T. Sbircea, E. Bandiello, M.R. Niazi, D.A. Hanifi, 
M. Sessolo, A. Amassian, G.G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Molecular 
design of semiconducting polymers for high-performance organic electrochemical 
transistors, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016) 10252–10259, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jacs.6b05280. 
[9] M. Sessolo, D. Khodagholy, J. Rivnay, F. Maddalena, M. Gleyzes, E. Steidl, 
B. Buisson, G.G. Malliaras, Easy-to-fabricate conducting polymer microelectrode 
arrays, Adv. Mater. 25 (2013) 2135–2139, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201204322. 
[10] G. Mattana, A. Loi, M. Woytasik, M. Barbaro, V. No¨el, B. Piro, Inkjet-printing: a 
new fabrication technology for organic transistors, Adv. Mater. Technol. 2 
(2017), 1700063, https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.201700063. 
[11] R. Brooke, D. Evans, M. Dienel, P. Hojati-Talemi, P. Murphy, M. Fabretto, Inkjet 
printing and vapor phase polymerization: patterned conductive PEDOT for 
electronic applications, J. Mater. Chem. C. 1 (2013) 3353–3358, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/c3tc30356j. 
[12] G. Scheiblin, A. Aliane, X. Strakosas, V.F. Curto, R. Coppard, G. Marchand, R. 
M. Owens, P. Mailley, G.G. Malliaras, Screen-printed organic electrochemical 
transistors for metabolite sensing, MRS Commun. 5 (2015) 507–511, https://doi. 
org/10.1557/mrc.2015.52. 
[13] S. Sukeerthi, A.Q. Contractor, Molecular sensors and sensor arrays based on 
polyaniline microtubules, Anal. Chem. 71 (1999) 2231–2236, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/ac9810213. 
[14] D.A. Koutsouras, P. Gkoupidenis, C. Stolz, V. Subramanian, G.G. Malliaras, D. 
C. Martin, Impedance spectroscopy of spin-cast and electrochemically deposited 
PEDOT:PSS films on microfabricated electrodes with various areas, 
ChemElectroChem 4 (2017) 2321–2327, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
celc.201700297. 
[15] J. Rivnay, S. Inal, A. Salleo, R.M. Owens, M. Berggren, G.G. Malliaras, Organic 
electrochemical transistors, Nat. Rev. Mater. 3 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
natrevmats.2017.86. 
[16] A. Savva, S. Wustoni, S. Inal, Ionic-to-electronic coupling efficiency in PEDOT:PSS 
films operated in aqueous electrolytes, J. Mater. Chem. C. 6 (2018) 12023–12030, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c8tc02195c. 
[17] H. Shi, C. Liu, Q. Jiang, J. Xu, Effective approaches to improve the electrical 
conductivity of PEDOT:PSS: a review, Adv. Electron. Mater. 1 (2015), 1500017, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/AELM.201500017. 
[18] C. Yijie Xia, K. Sun, J. Ouyang, Y. Xia, K. Sun, J. Ouyang, Solution-processed 
metallic conducting polymer films as transparent electrode of optoelectronic 
devices, Adv. Mater. 24 (2012) 2436–2440, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ADMA.201104795. 
[19] K. Feron, R. Lim, C. Sherwood, A. Keynes, A. Brichta, P.C. Dastoor, Organic 
bioelectronics: materials and biocompatibility, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19 (2018), https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijms19082382. 
[20] M. Ramuz, A. Hama, M. Huerta, J. Rivnay, P. Leleux, R.M. Owens, Combined 
optical and electronic sensing of epithelial cells using planar organic transistors, 
Adv. Mater. 26 (2014) 7083–7090, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201401706. 
[21] G. Dijk, A.L. Rutz, G.G. Malliaras, Stability of PEDOT:PSS-coated gold electrodes 
in cell culture conditions, Adv. Mater. Technol. 5 (2020), https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/admt.201900662. 
[22] D. Khodagholy, J. Rivnay, M. Sessolo, M. Gurfinkel, P. Leleux, L.H. Jimison, 
E. Stavrinidou, T. Herve, S. Sanaur, R.M. Owens, G.G. Malliaras, High 
transconductance organic electrochemical transistors, Nat. Commun. 4 (2013), 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3133. 
[23] I. Uguz, M. Ganji, A. Hama, A. Tanaka, S. Inal, A. Youssef, R.M. Owens, P. 
P. Quilichini, A. Ghestem, C. Bernard, S.A. Dayeh, G.G. Malliaras, Autoclave 
sterilization of PEDOT:PSS electrophysiology devices, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5 
(2016) 3094–3098, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201600870. 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
25
[24] C. Yao, Q. Li, J. Guo, F. Yan, I.M. Hsing, Rigid and flexible organic 
electrochemical transistor arrays for monitoring action potentials from 
electrogenic cells, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 4 (2015) 528–533, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adhm.201400406. 
[25] J. Rivnay, M. Ramuz, P. Leleux, A. Hama, M. Huerta, R.M. Owens, Organic 
electrochemical transistors for cell-based impedance sensing, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
106 (2015), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4906872. 
[26] A.M. Pappa, O. Parlak, G. Scheiblin, P. Mailley, A. Salleo, R.M. Owens, Organic 
electronics for point-of-care metabolite monitoring, Trends Biotechnol. 36 (2018) 
45–59, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2017.10.022. 
[27] D.T. Simon, S. Kurup, K.C. Larsson, R. Hori, K. Tybrandt, M. Goiny, E.W.H. Jager, 
M. Berggren, B. Canlon, A. Richter-Dahlfors, Organic electronics for precise 
delivery of neurotransmitters to modulate mammalian sensory function, Nat. 
Mater. 8 (2009) 742–746, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2494. 
[28] M. Berggren, G.G. Malliaras, How conducting polymer electrodes operate, 
Science (2019) 233–234, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw9295. 
[29] A. Press, D.J. Williams, J.E. Sohn, S.R. Marder, D. Josse, J. Zyss, M. Barzoukas, 
I. Ledoux, B.G. Tiemann, A.C. Friedli, J.W. Perry, C. Runser, A. Fort, V. Bloy, 
V. Alain, P.V. Bedworth, S. Lebus, R. Wortmann, F. Kajzar, C. Sentein, R.E. Cohen, 
R.R. Schrock, R.J. Silbey, G. Pucceti, W.E. Torruellas, V. Ricci, S. Gilmour, J. Li, 
G.U. Bublitz, S.G. Boxer, D.M. Burland, J. Hedrick, V.Y. Lee, R.D. Miller, C. 
M. Seymour, W. Volksen, C.A. Walsh, K.Y. Wong, K. Drost, Y. Cai, F. Effenberger, 
S. Beckmann, C. Glania, H. Brisset, A. Riou, R. Hierle, J. Roncali, L. Midrier, 
J. Muller, D.S. Chemla, C.W. Dirk, L.T. Cheng, M.G. Kuzyk, B.M. Pierce, G. Chen, 
W.A. Goddard, Conducting polymer hydrogels as 3D electrodes: applications for 
supercapacitors ** by soumyadeb ghosh * and olle ingan¨as, Adv. Mater. 11 
(1999) 1214–1218. 
[30] X. Cui, V.A. Lee, Y. Raphael, J.A. Wiler, J.F. Hetke, D.J. Anderson, D.C. Martin, 
Surface modification of neural recording electrodes with conducting polymer/ 
biomolecule blends, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 56 (2001) 261–272, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/1097-4636(200108)56:2<261::AID-JBM1094>3.0.CO;2-I. 
[31] W. Lee, S. Kobayashi, M. Nagase, Y. Jimbo, I. Saito, Y. Inoue, T. Yambe, 
M. Sekino, G.G. Malliaras, T. Yokota, M. Tanaka, T. Someya, Nonthrombogenic, 
stretchable, active multielectrode array for electroanatomical mapping, Sci. Adv. 
4 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aau2426. 
[32] J.T. Friedlein, R.R. McLeod, J. Rivnay, Device physics of organic electrochemical 
transistors, Org. Electron. Phys., Mater. Appl. 63 (2018) 398–414, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.orgel.2018.09.010. 
[33] J. Rivnay, P. Leleux, M. Ferro, M. Sessolo, A. Williamson, D.A. Koutsouras, 
D. Khodagholy, M. Ramuz, X. Strakosas, R.M. Owens, C. Benar, J.M. Badier, 
C. Bernard, G.G. Malliaras, High-performance transistors for bioelectronics 
through tuning of channel thickness, Sci. Adv. 1 (2015) 1–6, https://doi.org/ 
10.1126/sciadv.1400251. 
[34] C.M. Proctor, J. Rivnay, G.G. Malliaras, Understanding volumetric capacitance in 
conducting polymers, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 54 (2016) 1433–1436, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/polb.24038. 
[35] D. Loveday, P. Peterson, B. Rodgers, Evaluation of organic coatings with 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: part 1: Fundamentals of 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, CoatingsTech 1 (2004) 46–52. 
[36] A.R. Hambley, Electrical Engineering: Principles and Applications, sixth ed., 
Pearson Education, Inc, 2013. 
[37] P.T. Kissinger, W.R. Heineman, Cyclic voltammetry, J. Chem. Educ. 60 (1983) 
702–706, https://doi.org/10.1021/ed060p702. 
[38] G. Tarabella, C. Santato, S.Y. Yang, S. Iannotta, G.G. Malliaras, F. Cicoira, Effect 
of the gate electrode on the response of organic electrochemical transistors, Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 97 (2010), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3491216. 
[39] T. Gerasimenko, S. Nikulin, G. Zakharova, A. Poloznikov, V. Petrov, A. Baranova, 
A. Tonevitsky, Impedance spectroscopy as a tool for monitoring performance in 
3D models of epithelial tissues, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7 (2020) 474, https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/FBIOE.2019.00474/BIBTEX. 
[40] G. Dijk, H.J. Ruigrok, R.P. O’Connor, Influence of PEDOT:PSS coating thickness 
on the performance of stimulation electrodes, Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2000675 
(2020) 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202000675. 
[41] M. Ganji, A. Tanaka, V. Gilja, E. Halgren, S.A. Dayeh, Scaling effects on the 
electrochemical stimulation performance of Au, Pt, and PEDOT:PSS 
electrocorticography arrays, Adv. Funct. Mater. 27 (2017) 1–14, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adfm.201703019. 
[42] N. Elgrishi, K.J. Rountree, B.D. McCarthy, E.S. Rountree, T.T. Eisenhart, J. 
L. Dempsey, A practical beginner’s guide to cyclic voltammetry, J. Chem. Educ. 
95 (2018) 197–206, https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.JCHEMED.7B00361/SUPPL_ 
FILE/ED7B00361_SI_002.DOCX. 
[43] M. ElMahmoudy, S. Inal, A. Charrier, I. Uguz, G.G. Malliaras, S.M. Sanaur 
ElMahmoudy, S. Inal, I. Uguz, G.G. Malliaras, A. Charrier, S. Sanaur, Tailoring the 
electrochemical and mechanical properties of PEDOT:PSS films for bioelectronics, 
Macromol. Mater. Eng. 302 (2017), 1600497, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
MAME.201600497. 
[44] E. Stavrinidou, P. Leleux, H. Rajaona, D. Khodagholy, J. Rivnay, M. Lindau, 
S. Sanaur, G.G. Malliaras, Direct measurement of ion mobility in a conducting 
polymer, Adv. Mater. 25 (2013) 4488–4493, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201301240. 
[45] G.A. Snook, P. Kao, A.S. Best, Conducting-polymer-based supercapacitor devices 
and electrodes, J. Power Sources 196 (2011) 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2010.06.084. 
[46] D. Villers, D. Jobin, C. Soucy, D. Cossement, R. Chahine, L. Breau, D. B´elanger, 
The influence of the range of electroactivity and capacitance of conducting 
polymers on the performance of carbon conducting polymer hybrid 
supercapacitor, J. Electrochem. Soc. 150 (2003) A747, https://doi.org/10.1149/ 
1.1571530. 
[47] S. Yamamoto, G.G. Malliaras, Controlling the neuromorphic behavior of organic 
electrochemical transistors by blending mixed and ion conductors, ACS Appl. 
Electron. Mater. (2020), https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.0c00203. 
[48] S. Inal, G.G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, Benchmarking organic mixed conductors for 
transistors, Nat. Commun. 8 (2017) 1–6, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017- 
01812-w. 
[49] M.J. Donahue, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, S. Inal, J. Qu, R.M. Owens, D. Mecerreyes, G. 
G. Malliaras, D.C. Martin, Tailoring PEDOT properties for applications in 
bioelectronics, Mater. Sci. Eng. R. Rep. 140 (2020), 100546, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.mser.2020.100546. 
[50] C. Dhand, M. Das, M. Datta, B.D. Malhotra, Recent advances in polyaniline based 
biosensors, Biosens. Bioelectron. 26 (2011) 2811–2821, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.bios.2010.10.017. 
[51] K. Naoi, Y. Oura, H. Tsujimoto, Conducting Polymer With Favored Structure As a 
Possible Ultracapacitor Material, in: F.M. Delnick, D. Ingersoll, X. Andrieu, K. 
Naoi (Eds.), Proc. Symp. Electrochem. Capacit. II, The Electrochemical Society, 
Tokyo, Japan, 1997: pp. 120–126. 
[52] G.A. Snook, C. Peng, D.J. Fray, G.Z. Chen, Achieving high electrode specific 
capacitance with materials of low mass specific capacitance: Potentiostatically 
grown thick micro-nanoporous PEDOT films, Electrochem. Commun. 9 (2007) 
83–88, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2006.08.037. 
[53] A. Kros, N.A.J.M. Sommerdijk, R.J.M. Nolte, Poly(pyrrole) versus poly(3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene): implications for biosensor applications, in: Sensors 
Actuators B Chem., Elsevier, 2005, pp. 289–295, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2004.08.011. 
[54] H. Yamato, M. Ohwa, W. Wernet, Stability of polypyrrole and poly(3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene) for biosensor application, J. Electroanal. Chem. 397 
(1995) 163–170, https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0728(95)04156-8. 
[55] C. Pitsalidis, A.M. Pappa, A.J. Boys, Y. Fu, C.M. Moysidou, D. van Niekerk, 
J. Saez, A. Savva, D. Iandolo, R.M. Owens, Organic bioelectronics for in vitro 
systems, Chem. Rev. 122 (2022) 4700–4790, https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS. 
CHEMREV.1C00539/ASSET/IMAGES/ACS.CHEMREV.1C00539.SOCIAL.JPEG_ 
V03. 
[56] A. Giovannitti, I.P. Maria, D. Hanifi, M.J. Donahue, D. Bryant, K.J. Barth, B. 
E. Makdah, A. Savva, D. Moia, M. Zetek, P.R.F. Barnes, O.G. Reid, S. Inal, 
G. Rumbles, G.G. Malliaras, J. Nelson, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, The role of the 
side chain on the performance of N-type conjugated polymers in aqueous 
electrolytes, Chem. Mater. 30 (2018) 2945–2953, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
chemmater.8b00321. 
[57] A.M. Pappa, D. Ohayon, A. Giovannitti, I.P. Maria, A. Savva, I. Uguz, J. Rivnay, 
I. McCulloch, R.M. Owens, S. Inal, Direct metabolite detection with an n-type 
accumulation mode organic electrochemical transistor, Sci. Adv. 4 (2018), 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat0911. 
[58] A. Savva, D. Ohayon, J. Surgailis, A.F. Paterson, T.C. Hidalgo, X. Chen, I.P. Maria, 
B.D. Paulsen, A.J. Petty, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, S. Inal, Solvent engineering for 
high-performance n-type organic electrochemical transistors, Adv. Electron. 
Mater. 5 (2019), 1900249, https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.201900249. 
[59] M. Kawan, T.C. Hidalgo, W. Du, A.-M. Pappa, R.M. Owens, I. McCulloch, S. Inal, 
Monitoring supported lipid bilayers with n-type organic electrochemical 
transistors, Mater. Horiz. (2020), https://doi.org/10.1039/d0mh00548g. 
[60] J. Surgailis, A. Savva, V. Druet, B.D. Paulsen, R. Wu, A. Hamidi-Sakr, D. Ohayon, 
G. Nikiforidis, X. Chen, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay, S. Inal, Mixed conduction in an N- 
Type organic semiconductor in the absence of hydrophilic side-chains, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 31 (2021), 2010165, https://doi.org/10.1002/ADFM.202010165. 
[61] H. Sun, M. Vagin, S. Wang, X. Crispin, R. Forchheimer, M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, 
Complementary logic circuits based on high-performance n-type organic 
electrochemical transistors, Adv. Mater. 30 (2018), 1704916, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.201704916. 
[62] C.Y. Yang, M.A. Stoeckel, T.P. Ruoko, H.Y. Wu, X. Liu, N.B. Kolhe, Z. Wu, 
Y. Puttisong, C. Musumeci, M. Massetti, H. Sun, K. Xu, D. Tu, W.M. Chen, H. 
Y. Woo, M. Fahlman, S.A. Jenekhe, M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, A high-conductivity 
n-type polymeric ink for printed electronics, 2021 121, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 
1–8, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22528-y. 
[63] A. Elschner, S. Kirchmeyer, W. Lovenich, U. Merker, K. Reuter, PEDOT: Principles 
and Applications of an Intrinsically Conductive Polymer, CRC Press, 2010. 〈https 
://books.google.co.uk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=e12gOPc4lWAC&oi=fn 
d&pg=PP1&dq=PEDOT:+Principles+and+Applications+of+an+Intrinsically+
Conductive+Polymer&ots=BXbjG6dI1s 
&sig=IuRUwEw7fG7-WcEYmGZMTJz9dpM&redir_esc=y#v=onepage 
&q=PEDOT%3A〉Principles and Applicatio (accessed April 3, 2020). 
[64] B. Winther-Jensen, K. West, Vapor-phase polymerization of 3,4-ethylenedioxy­
thiophene: a route to highly conducting polymer surface layers, Macromolecules 
37 (2004) 4538–4543, https://doi.org/10.1021/ma049864l. 
[65] A. Giovannitti, C.B. Nielsen, D.T. Sbircea, S. Inal, M. Donahue, M.R. Niazi, D. 
A. Hanifi, A. Amassian, G.G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, N-type organic 
electrochemical transistors with stability in water, Nat. Commun. 7 (2016), 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13066. 
[66] A. Blau, A. Murr, S. Wolff, E. Sernagor, P. Medini, G. Iurilli, C. Ziegler, 
F. Benfenati, Flexible, all-polymer microelectrode arrays for the capture of 
cardiac and neuronal signals, Biomaterials 32 (2011) 1778–1786, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.11.014. 
[67] A.J. Boys, A.C. Lombarte, A.G. Gonzalez, D.C. van Niekerk, S. Hilton, D. 
G. Barone, C.M. Proctor, R.M. Owens, G.G. Malliaras, 3D bioelectronics with a 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
26
remodellable matrix for long-term tissue integration and recording, Adv. Mater. 
(2022), 2207847, https://doi.org/10.1002/ADMA.202207847. 
[68] C.M. Tringides, N. Vachicouras, I. de L´azaro, H. Wang, A. Trouillet, B.R. Seo, 
A. Elosegui-Artola, F. Fallegger, Y. Shin, C. Casiraghi, K. Kostarelos, S.P. Lacour, 
D.J. Mooney, Viscoelastic surface electrode arrays to interface with viscoelastic 
tissues, 2021 169, Nat. Nanotechnol. 16 (2021) 1019–1029, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41565-021-00926-z. 
[69] D.C. Rodger, A.J. Fong, W. Li, H. Ameri, A.K. Ahuja, C. Gutierrez, I. Lavrov, 
H. Zhong, P.R. Menon, E. Meng, J.W. Burdick, R.R. Roy, V.R. Edgerton, J. 
D. Weiland, M.S. Humayun, Y.C. Tai, Flexible parylene-based multielectrode 
array technology for high-density neural stimulation and recording, Sens. 
Actuators, B Chem. 132 (2008) 449–460, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
snb.2007.10.069. 
[70] K.J. James, R.A. Normann, Low-stress silicon nitride for insulating multielectrode 
arrays, Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. - Proc. 16 (1994) 836–837. 〈https:// 
doi.org/10.1109/iembs.1994.415170〉. 
[71] X. Meng, Y.C. Byun, H.S. Kim, J.S. Lee, A.T. Lucero, L. Cheng, J. Kim, Atomic 
layer deposition of silicon nitride thin films: a review of recent progress, 
challenges, and outlooks, Mater. (Basel) 9 (2016), https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ma9121007. 
[72] D. Seidel, J. Obendorf, B. Englich, H.G. Jahnke, V. Semkova, S. Haupt, M. Girard, 
M. Peschanski, O. Brüstle, A.A. Robitzki, Impedimetric real-time monitoring of 
neural pluripotent stem cell differentiation process on microelectrode arrays, 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 86 (2016) 277–286, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bios.2016.06.056. 
[73] M. Braendlein, A.M. Pappa, M. Ferro, A. Lopresti, C. Acquaviva, E. Mamessier, G. 
G. Malliaras, R.M. Owens, Lactate detection in tumor cell cultures using organic 
transistor circuits, Adv. Mater. 29 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201605744. 
[74] Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Chen, T. Lei, Y. Kim, S. Niu, H. Wang, X. Wang, A.M. Foudeh, J. 
B.-H. Tok, Z. Bao, Soft and elastic hydrogel-based microelectronics for localized 
low-voltage neuromodulation, 2019 31, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3 (2019) 58–68, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-018-0335-6. 
[75] N. De La Oliva, M. Mueller, T. Stieglitz, X. Navarro, J. Del Valle, On the use of 
Parylene C polymer as substrate for peripheral nerve electrodes, Sci. Rep. 8 
(2018) 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-24502-z. 
[76] J. Slavík, J. Skopalík, I. Provazník, J. Hub´alek, Multi-electrode array with a 
planar surface for cell patterning by microprinting, Sens. (Switz. ) 19 (2019) 
1–11, https://doi.org/10.3390/s19245379. 
[77] S. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Zhang, W. Xie, Ultrasonic spray coating polymer and small 
molecular organic film for organic light-emitting devices, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 
37042, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep37042. 
[78] J.G. Tait, B.J. Worfolk, S.A. Maloney, T.C. Hauger, A.L. Elias, J.M. Buriak, K. 
D. Harris, Spray coated high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS transparent electrodes for 
stretchable and mechanically-robust organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. 
Cells 110 (2013) 98–106, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2012.09.005. 
[79] J.P. Lock, S.G. Im, K.K. Gleason, Oxidative chemical vapor deposition of 
electrically conducting poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) films, Macromolecules 
39 (2006) 5326–5329, https://doi.org/10.1021/ma060113o. 
[80] A. Dominguez-Alfaro, N. Alegret, B. Arnaiz, J.M. Gonz´alez-Domínguez, A. Martin- 
Pacheco, U. Cossío, L. Porcarelli, S. Bosi, E. V´azquez, D. Mecerreyes, M. Prato, 
Tailored methodology based on vapor phase polymerization to manufacture 
PEDOT/CNT scaffolds for tissue engineering, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 6 (2020) 
1269–1278, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.9b01316. 
[81] J.M. Murbach, S. Currlin, A. Widener, Y. Tong, S. Chhatre, V. Subramanian, D. 
C. Martin, B.N. Johnson, K.J. Otto, In situ electrochemical polymerization of poly 
(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) for peripheral nerve interfaces, MRS 
Commun. 8 (2018) 1043–1049, https://doi.org/10.1557/mrc.2018.138. 
[82] S. Carli, M. Bianchi, E. Zucchini, M. Di Lauro, M. Prato, M. Murgia, L. Fadiga, 
F. Biscarini, Electrodeposited PEDOT:nafion composite for neural recording and 
stimulation, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 8 (2019) 1–10, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adhm.201900765. 
[83] X. Cui, D.C. Martin, Electrochemical-deposition-and-characterization-of-poly-3-4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene-on-neural-microelectrode-arrays_2003_sensors-and- 
actuators-B-chemic.pdf, Sens. Actuators 89 (2003) 92–102. 
[84] R. Wen, A.H. Zhang, D. Liu, J. Feng, J. Yang, D. Xia, J. Wang, C. Li, T. Zhang, 
N. Hu, T. Hang, G. He, X. Xie, Intracellular delivery and sensing system based on 
electroplated conductive nanostraw arrays, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces (2019), 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b15619. 
[85] Z.P. Yin, Y.A. Huang, N. Bin Bu, X.M. Wang, Y.L. Xiong, Inkjet printing for flexible 
electronics: materials, processes and equipments, 2010 5530, Chin. Sci. Bull. 55 
(2010) 3383–3407, https://doi.org/10.1007/S11434-010-3251-Y. 
[86] T. Kawase, T. Shimoda, C. Newsome, H. Sirringhaus, R.H. Friend, Inkjet printing 
of polymer thin film transistors, Thin Solid Films 438–439 (2003) 279–287, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-6090(03)00801-0. 
[87] A. Elschner, The spectral sensitivity of PEDOT:PSS films, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. 
Cells 95 (2011) 1333–1338, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2010.12.029. 
[88] A. Savva, F. Petraki, P. Elefteriou, L. Sygellou, M. Voigt, M. Giannouli, S. Kennou, 
J. Nelson, D.D.C. Bradley, C.J. Brabec, S.A. Choulis, The effect of organic and 
metal oxide interfacial layers on the performance of inverted organic 
photovoltaics, Adv. Energy Mater. 3 (2013) 391–398, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
AENM.201200317. 
[89] P.M. Smith, L. Su, W. Gong, N. Nakamura, B. Reeja-Jayan, S. Shen, Thermal 
conductivity of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) films engineered by oxidative 
chemical vapor deposition (oCVD), RSC Adv. 8 (2018) 19348–19352, https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C8RA03302A. 
[90] X. Cui, D.C. Martin, Electrochemical deposition and characterization of poly(3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene) on neural microelectrode arrays, Sens. Actuators, B 
Chem. 89 (2003) 92–102, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-4005(02)00448-3. 
[91] S.H. Eom, S. Senthilarasu, P. Uthirakumar, S.C. Yoon, J. Lim, C. Lee, H.S. Lim, 
J. Lee, S.H. Lee, Polymer solar cells based on inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS layer, 
Org. Electron. 10 (2009) 536–542, https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ORGEL.2009.01.015. 
[92] Z. Xiong, C. Liu, Optimization of inkjet printed PEDOT:PSS thin films through 
annealing processes, Org. Electron. 13 (2012) 1532–1540, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/J.ORGEL.2012.05.005. 
[93] Y. Jang, J. Jo, D.S. Kim, Control of doctor-blade coated poly (3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) electrodes shape on 
prepatterned substrates via microflow control in a drying droplet, J. Polym. Sci. 
Part B Polym. Phys. 49 (2011) 1590–1596, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
POLB.22347. 
[94] M.A. Gos´alvez, I. Zubel, E. Viinikka, Wet etching of silicon, Handb. Silicon Based 
MEMS Mater. Technol. (2010) 447–480, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12- 
817786-0.00017-7. 
[95] A. Khaldi, A. Maziz, C. Plesse, C. Soyer, F. Vidal, E. Cattan, Synergetic PEDOT 
degradation during a reactive ion etching process, Sens. Actuators B Chem. 229 
(2016) 635–645, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SNB.2016.02.009. 
[96] F. Laermer, S. Franssila, L. Sainiemi, K. Kolari, Deep Reactive Ion Etching, Handb. 
Silicon Based MEMS Mater. Technol. Second Ed. (2015) 444–469. 〈https://doi. 
org/10.1016/B978–0-323–29965-7.00021-X〉. 
[97] J.A. Defranco, B.S. Schmidt, M. Lipson, G.G. Malliaras, Photolithographic 
patterning of organic electronic materials, Org. Electron. 7 (2006) 22–28, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.orgel.2005.10.002. 
[98] S. Schiestel, P. Banniza, G.K. Wolf, K. Edinger, Modification of intrinsically 
conducting polymers by ion implantation, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. 
Sect. B Beam Interact. Mater. At. 116 (1996) 164–167, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0168-583X(96)00122-X. 
[99] P.G. Gl¨oersen, Ion−beam etching, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 12 (1998) 28, https://doi. 
org/10.1116/1.568767. 
[100] S.A. Rutledge, A.S. Helmy, Etch-free patterning of poly(3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) for optoelectronics, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 7 (2015) 3940–3948, https://doi.org/10.1021/am507981d. 
[101] P. Duffy, S. McMahon, X. Wang, S. Keaveney, E.D. O’Cearbhaill, I. Quintana, F. 
J. Rodríguez, W. Wang, Synthetic bioresorbable poly-α-hydroxyesters as 
peripheral nerve guidance conduits; a review of material properties, design 
strategies and their efficacy to date, Biomater. Sci. 7 (2019) 4912–4943, https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/c9bm00246d. 
[102] F. Zhang, T. Nyberg, O. Ingan¨as, Conducting polymer nanowires and nanodots 
made with soft lithography, Nano Lett. 2 (2002) 1373–1377, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/nl025804m. 
[103] (*) Fengling Zhang, Tobias Nyberg, O. Ingan¨as, Conducting polymer nanowires 
and nanodots made with soft lithography, Nano Lett. 2 (2002) 1373–1377, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/NL025804M. 
[104] T.R. Hebner, C.C. Wu, D. Marcy, M.H. Lu, J.C. Sturm, Ink-jet printing of doped 
polymers for organic light emitting devices, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72 (1998) 519–521, 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.120807. 
[105] J. Bharathan, Y. Yang, Polymer electroluminescent devices processed by inkjet 
printing: I. Polymer light-emitting logo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72 (1998) 2660–2662, 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.121090. 
[106] Z. Bao, Materials and fabrication needs for low-cost organic transistor circuits, 
Adv. Mater. 12 (2000) 227–230, https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1521-4095 
(200002)12:3<227::AID-ADMA227>3.0.CO;2-U. 
[107] C. Didier, A. Kundu, S. Rajaraman, Capabilities and limitations of 3D printed 
microserpentines and integrated 3D electrodes for stretchable and conformable 
biosensor applications, Microsyst. Nanoeng. 6 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41378-019-0129-3. 
[108] F.K. Voss, F. Ullrich, J. Münch, K. Lazarow, D. Lutter, M. a Andrade-navarro, J. 
P. Von Kries, T. Stauber, J. Thomas, SI - Additive manufacturing of hydrogel- 
based materials for next-generation implantable medical devices, Sci. Robot 
(2017) 16, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1252826. 
[109] N. Adly, S. Weidlich, S. Seyock, F. Brings, A. Yakushenko, A. Offenh¨ausser, 
B. Wolfrum, Printed microelectrode arrays on soft materials: from PDMS to 
hydrogels, npj Flex. Electron. 2 (2018) 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528- 
018-0027-z. 
[110] K.S. Park, J. Baek, Y. Park, L. Lee, Y.E.K. Lee, Y. Kang, M.M. Sung, Inkjet-assisted 
nanotransfer printing for large-scale integrated nanopatterns of various single- 
crystal organic materials, Adv. Mater. 28 (2016) 2874–2880, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.201505594. 
[111] H. Yuk, B. Lu, S. Lin, K. Qu, J. Xu, J. Luo, X. Zhao, 3D printing of conducting 
polymers, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 1604, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020- 
15316-7. 
[112] B.J. Lim, C.A. Mirkin, Electrostatically Driven Dip-Pen Nanolithography, (2010) 
1474–1477. 
[113] S. Kr¨amer, R.R. Fuierer, C.B. Gorman, Scanning probe lithography using self- 
assembled monolayers, Chem. Rev. 103 (2003) 4367–4418, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/cr020704m. 
[114] A.M. Lozano, N. Lipsman, H. Bergman, P. Brown, S. Chabardes, J.W. Chang, 
K. Matthews, C.C. McIntyre, T.E. Schlaepfer, M. Schulder, Y. Temel, J. Volkmann, 
J.K. Krauss, Deep brain stimulation: current challenges and future directions, 
2019 153, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15 (2019) 148–160, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41582-018-0128-2. 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
27
[115] R.L. Johnson, C.G. Wilson, A review of vagus nerve stimulation as a therapeutic 
intervention, J. Inflamm. Res. 11 (2018) 203–213, https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR. 
S163248. 
[116] K.D. Wise, Silicon microsystems for neuroscience and neural prostheses, IEEE 
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 24 (2005) 22–29, https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
MEMB.2005.1511497. 
[117] P.K. Campbell, K.E. Jones, R.J. Huber, K.W. Horch, R.A. Normann, A silicon- 
based, three-dimensional neural interface: manufacturing processes for an 
intracortical electrode array, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 38 (1991) 758–768, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/10.83588. 
[118] R. Biran, D.C. Martin, P.A. Tresco, Neuronal cell loss accompanies the brain tissue 
response to chronically implanted silicon microelectrode arrays, Exp. Neurol. 195 
(2005) 115–126, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2005.04.020. 
[119] R. Chen, A. Canales, P. Anikeeva, Neural recording and modulation technologies, 
Nat. Rev. Mater. 2 (2017) 1–16, https://doi.org/10.1038/natrevmats.2016.93. 
[120] K.A. Ludwig, J.D. Uram, J. Yang, D.C. Martin, D.R. Kipke, Chronic neural 
recordings using silicon microelectrode arrays electrochemically deposited with a 
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) film *, J. Neural Eng. 3 (2006) 59, 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/3/1/007. 
[121] M.D. Ferro, C.M. Proctor, A. Gonzalez, E. Zhao, A. Slezia, J. Pas, G. Dijk, M. 
J. Donahue, A. Williamson, G.G. Malliaras, L. Giocomo, N.A. Melosh, NeuroRoots, 
a bio-inspired, seamless Brain Machine Interface device for long-term recording, 
BioRxiv (2018) 1–18, https://doi.org/10.1101/460949. 
[122] A. Carnicer-Lombarte, S.T. Chen, G.G. Malliaras, D.G. Barone, Foreign body 
reaction to implanted biomaterials and its impact in nerve neuroprosthetics, 
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9 (2021) 271, https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
FBIOE.2021.622524/BIBTEX. 
[123] A. Williamson, M. Ferro, P. Leleux, E. Ismailova, A. Kaszas, T. Doublet, 
P. Quilichini, J. Rivnay, B. R´ozsa, G. Katona, C. Bernard, G.G. Malliaras, Localized 
neuron stimulation with organic electrochemical transistors on delaminating 
depth probes, Adv. Mater. 27 (2015) 4405–4410, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201500218. 
[124] A. Canales, X. Jia, U.P. Froriep, R.A. Koppes, C.M. Tringides, J. Selvidge, C. Lu, 
C. Hou, L. Wei, Y. Fink, P. Anikeeva, Multifunctional fibers for simultaneous 
optical, electrical and chemical interrogation of neural circuits in vivo, Nat. 
Biotechnol. 33 (2015) 277–284, https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3093. 
[125] P. Jastrzebska-Perfect, S. Chowdhury, G.D. Spyropoulos, Z. Zhao, C. Cea, J. 
N. Gelinas, D. Khodagholy, P. Jastrzebska-Perfect, S. Chowdhury, G. 
D. Spyropoulos, Z. Zhao, C. Cea, D. Khodagholy, J.N. Gelinas, Translational 
neuroelectronics, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30 (2020), 1909165, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/ADFM.201909165. 
[126] M. Jorfi, J.L. Skousen, C. Weder, J.R. Capadona, Progress towards biocompatible 
intracortical microelectrodes for neural interfacing applications, J. Neural Eng. 12 
(2015), 011001, https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/12/1/011001. 
[127] M.E.J. Obien, K. Deligkaris, T. Bullmann, D.J. Bakkum, U. Frey, Revealing 
neuronal function through microelectrode array recordings, Front. Neurosci. 9 
(2015) 423, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00423. 
[128] J. Rivnay, H. Wang, L. Fenno, K. Deisseroth, G.G. Malliaras, Next-generation 
probes, particles, and proteins for neural interfacing, Sci. Adv. 3 (2017), 
e1601649, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1601649. 
[129] B.J. Woodington, V.F. Curto, Y.L. Yu, H. Martínez-Domínguez, L. Coles, G. 
G. Malliaras, C.M. Proctor, D.G. Barone, Electronics with shape actuation for 
minimally invasive spinal cord stimulation, Sci. Adv. 7 (2021) 7833–7858, 
https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIADV.ABG7833/SUPPL_FILE/ABG7833_SM.PDF. 
[130] A. Kuruvilla, R. Flink, Intraoperative electrocorticography in epilepsy surgery: 
useful or not? Seizure 12 (2003) 577–584, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1059-1311 
(03)00095-5. 
[131] D. Khodagholy, T. Doublet, M. Gurfinkel, P. Quilichini, E. Ismailova, P. Leleux, 
T. Herve, S. Sanaur, C. Bernard, G.G. Malliaras, Highly conformable conducting 
polymer electrodes for in vivo recordings, Adv. Mater. 23 (2011) H268–H272, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201102378. 
[132] D. Khodagholy, J.N. Gelinas, T. Thesen, W. Doyle, O. Devinsky, G.G. Malliaras, 
G. Buzs´aki, NeuroGrid: recording action potentials from the surface of the brain, 
Nat. Neurosci. 18 (2015) 310–315, https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3905. 
[133] P. Jastrzebska-Perfect, G.D. Spyropoulos, C. Cea, Z. Zhao, O.J. Rauhala, 
A. Viswanathan, S.A. Sheth, J.N. Gelinas, D. Khodagholy, Mixed-conducting 
particulate composites for soft electronics, Sci. Adv. 6 (2020) 6767–6791, https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz6767. 
[134] C. Pitsalidis, A.-M. Pappa, A.J. Boys, Y. Fu, C.-M. Moysidou, D. van Niekerk, 
J. Saez, A. Savva, D. Iandolo, R.M. Owens, Organic bioelectronics for in vitro 
systems, acs.chemrev.1c00539, Chem. Rev. (2021), https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ACS.CHEMREV.1C00539. 
[135] A. Koklu, D. Ohayon, S. Wustoni, V. Druet, A. Saleh, S. Inal, Organic bioelectronic 
devices for metabolite sensing, Chem. Rev. 122 (2022) 4581–4635, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ACS.CHEMREV.1C00395/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/CR1C00395_ 
0024.JPEG. 
[136] R. Gifford, Continuous glucose monitoring: 40 years, what we’ve learned and 
what’s next, ChemPhysChem 14 (2013) 2032–2044, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
cphc.201300172. 
[137] B.A. Kros, S.W.F.M. Van H¨ovell, N.A.J.M. Sommerdijk, R.J.M. Nolte, Poly(3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene)-Based Glucose Biosensors**, (2010) 1555–1557. 
[138] J.Y. Wang, L.C. Chen, K.C. Ho, Synthesis of redox polymer nanobeads and 
nanocomposites for glucose biosensors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 5 (2013) 
7852–7861, https://doi.org/10.1021/am4018219. 
[139] E. Bihar, S. Wustoni, A.M. Pappa, K.N. Salama, D. Baran, S. Inal, A fully inkjet- 
printed disposable glucose sensor on paper, Npj Flex. Electron. 2 (2018) 1–8, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528-018-0044-y. 
[140] F. Wei, S. Cheng, Y. Korin, E.F. Reed, D. Gjertson, C.M. Ho, H.A. Gritsch, J. Veale, 
Serum creatinine detection by a conducting-polymer-based electrochemical 
sensor to identify allograft dysfunction, Anal. Chem. 84 (2012) 7933–7937, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ac3016888. 
[141] F.S. Belaidi, A. Civ´elas, V. Castagnola, A. Tsopela, L. Mazenq, P. Gros, J. Launay, 
P. Temple-Boyer, PEDOT-modified integrated microelectrodes for the detection of 
ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid, Sens. Actuators, B Chem. 214 (2015) 1–9, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2015.03.005. 
[142] A.K. Jayaram, A.M. Pappa, S. Ghosh, Z.A. Manzer, W.C. Traberg, T.P.J. Knowles, 
S. Daniel, R.M. Owens, Biomembranes in bioelectronic sensing, Trends 
Biotechnol. 40 (2022) 107–123, https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
TIBTECH.2021.06.001. 
[143] H.Y. Liu, A.M. Pappa, A. Pavia, C. Pitsalidis, Q. Thiburce, A. Salleo, R.M. Owens, 
S. Daniel, Self-assembly of mammalian-cell membranes on bioelectronic devices 
with functional transmembrane proteins, Langmuir 36 (2020) 7325–7331, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.0c00804. 
[144] A.-M. Pappa, H.-Y. Liu, W. Traberg-Christensen, Q. Thiburce, A. Savva, A. Pavia, 
A. Salleo, S. Daniel, R.M. Owens, Optical and electronic ion channel monitoring 
from native human membranes, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 12538–12545, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ACSNANO.0C01330. 
[145] Z. Lu, D. Van Niekerk, A. Savva, K. Kallitsis, Q. Thiburce, A. Salleo, A.-M. Pappa, 
R.M. Owens, Understanding electrochemical properties of supported lipid 
bilayers interfaced with organic electronic devices, J. Mater. Chem. C. 10 (2022) 
8050–8060, https://doi.org/10.1039/D2TC00826B. 
[146] T. Tang, A. Savva, W.C. Traberg, C. Xu, Q. Thiburce, H.-Y. Liu, A.-M. Pappa, 
E. Martinelli, A. Withers, M. Cornelius, A. Salleo, R.M. Owens, S. Daniel, 
Functional infectious nanoparticle detector: finding viruses by detecting their 
host entry functions using organic bioelectronic devices, acsnano.1c06813, ACS 
Nano (2021), https://doi.org/10.1021/ACSNANO.1C06813. 
[147] J. Pas, C. Pitsalidis, D.A. Koutsouras, P.P. Quilichini, F. Santoro, B. Cui, L. Gallais, 
R.P. O’Connor, G.G. Malliaras, R.M. Owens, Neurospheres on patterned PEDOT: 
PSS microelectrode arrays enhance electrophysiology recordings, Adv. Biosyst. 2 
(2018) 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1002/adbi.201700164. 
[148] S.M. Richardson-Burns, J.L. Hendricks, B. Foster, L.K. Povlich, D.H. Kim, D. 
C. Martin, Polymerization of the conducting polymer poly(3,4- 
ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) around living neural cells, Biomaterials 28 
(2007) 1539–1552, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.11.026. 
[149] E. Tomaskovic-Crook, P. Zhang, A. Ahtiainen, H. Kaisvuo, C.Y. Lee, S. Beirne, 
Z. Aqrawe, D. Svirskis, J. Hyttinen, G.G. Wallace, J. Travas-Sejdic, J.M. Crook, 
Human neural tissues from neural stem cells using conductive biogel and printed 
polymer microelectrode arrays for 3D electrical stimulation, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 
8 (2019) 1–10, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201900425. 
[150] D.A. Koutsouras, L.V. Lingstedt, K. Lieberth, J. Reinholz, V. Mail¨ander, P.W. 
M. Blom, P. Gkoupidenis, Probing the impedance of a biological tissue with 
PEDOT:PSS-coated metal electrodes: effect of electrode size on sensing efficiency, 
Adv. Healthc. Mater. 8 (2019), 1901215, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adhm.201901215. 
[151] J. Pine, Recording action potentials from cultured neurons with extracellular 
microcircuit electrodes, J. Neurosci. Methods 2 (1980) 19–31, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0165-0270(80)90042-4. 
[152] K. Benson, S. Cramer, H.J. Galla, Impedance-based cell monitoring: barrier 
properties and beyond, Fluids Barriers CNS 10 (2013) 5, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/2045-8118-10-5. 
[153] F. Ingels, B. Beck, M. Oth, P. Augustijns, Effect of simulated intestinal fluid on 
drug permeability estimation across Caco-2 monolayers, Int. J. Pharm. 274 
(2004) 221–232, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2004.01.014. 
[154] C.M. Lo, C.R. Keese, I. Giaever, Impedance analysis of MDCK cells measured by 
electric cell-substrate impedance sensing, Biophys. J. 69 (1995) 2800–2807, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3495(95)80153-0. 
[155] L.H. Jimison, S.A. Tria, D. Khodagholy, M. Gurfinkel, E. Lanzarini, A. Hama, G. 
G. Malliaras, R.M. Owens, Measurement of barrier tissue integrity with an organic 
electrochemical transistor, Adv. Mater. 24 (2012) 5919–5923, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.201202612. 
[156] S.A. Tria, M. Ramuz, M. Huerta, P. Leleux, J. Rivnay, L.H. Jimison, A. Hama, G. 
G. Malliaras, R.M. Owens, Dynamic monitoring of salmonella typhimurium 
infection of polarized epithelia using organic transistors, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 3 
(2014) 1053–1060, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201300632. 
[157] A. Susloparova, S. Halliez, S. Begard, M. Colin, L. Bu´ee, S. Pecqueur, F. Alibart, 
V. Thomy, S. Arscott, E. Pallecchi, Y. Coffinier, Low impedance and highly 
transparent microelectrode arrays (MEA) for in vitro neuron electrical activity 
probing, Sens. Actuators B Chem. 327 (2021), 128895, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
J.SNB.2020.128895. 
[158] S. Middya, V.F. Curto, A. Fern´andez-Villegas, M. Robbins, J. Gurke, E.J. 
M. Moonen, G.S. Kaminski Schierle, G.G. Malliaras, Microelectrode arrays for 
simultaneous electrophysiology and advanced optical microscopy, Adv. Sci. 8 
(2021), 2004434, https://doi.org/10.1002/ADVS.202004434. 
[159] A. Kalmykov, C. Huang, J. Bliley, D. Shiwarski, J. Tashman, A. Abdullah, S. 
K. Rastogi, S. Shukla, E. Mataev, A.W. Feinberg, K.J. Hsia, T. Cohen-Karni, Organ- 
on-e-chip: three-dimensional self-rolled biosensor array for electrical 
interrogations of human electrogenic spheroids, Sci. Adv. 5 (2019) eaax0729, 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax0729. 
[160] Q. Li, K. Nan, P. Le Floch, Z. Lin, H. Sheng, T.S. Blum, J. Liu, Cyborg organoids: 
implantation of nanoelectronics via organogenesis for tissue-wide 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Materials Science & Engineering R 153 (2023) 100726
28
electrophysiology, Nano Lett. 19 (2019) 5781–5789, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ACS.NANOLETT.9B02512. 
[161] X. Wang, R. Feiner, H. Luan, Q. Zhang, S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, M. Han, Y. Li, R. Sun, 
H. Wang, T.L. Liu, X. Guo, H. Oved, N. Noor, A. Shapira, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, 
T. Dvir, J.A. Rogers, Three-dimensional electronic scaffolds for monitoring and 
regulation of multifunctional hybrid tissues, Extrem. Mech. Lett. 35 (2020), 
100634, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EML.2020.100634. 
[162] T. Paltrinieri, L. Bondi, V. Đerek, B. Fraboni, E. Daniel Głowacki, T. Cramer, 
T. Paltrinieri, L. Bondi, B. Fraboni, T. Cramer, V. Đerek, E.D. Głowacki, 
Understanding photocapacitive and photofaradaic processes in organic 
semiconductor photoelectrodes for optobioelectronics, Adv. Funct. Mater. 31 
(2021), 2010116, https://doi.org/10.1002/ADFM.202010116. 
[163] D. Rand, M. Jakeˇsov´a, G. Lubin, I. Ve, M. David-Pur, V. Đerek, T. Cramer, 
N. Serdar Sariciftci, Y. Hanein, E. Daniel Głowacki, N.D. Rand, G. Lubin, 
M. David-Pur, Y. Hanein, M. Jakeˇsov´a, V. Đerek, E.D. Głowacki, I. Ve, T. Cramer, 
V. Berti Pichat, I.N.S. Sariciftci, Direct electrical neurostimulation with organic 
pigment photocapacitors, Adv. Mater. 30 (2018), 1707292, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/ADMA.201707292. 
[164] J. Hopkins, L. Travaglini, A. Lauto, T. Cramer, B. Fraboni, J. Seidel, D. Mawad, 
Photoactive organic substrates for cell stimulation: progress and perspectives, 
Adv. Mater. Technol. 4 (2019), 1800744, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ADMT.201800744. 
[165] M. Silverå Ejneby, M. Jakeˇsov´a, J.J. Ferrero, L. Migliaccio, I. Sahalianov, Z. Zhao, 
M. Berggren, D. Khodagholy, V. Đerek, J.N. Gelinas, E.D. Głowacki, Chronic 
electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves via deep-red light transduced by an 
implanted organic photocapacitor, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2021 (2021) 1–13, https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41551-021-00817-7. 
[166] F. Missey, B. Botzanowski, L. Migliaccio, E. Acerbo, E.D. Glowacki, A. Williamson, 
Organic electrolytic photocapacitors for stimulation of the mouse somatosensory 
cortex, J. Neural Eng. 18 (2021), 066016, https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/ 
AC37A6. 
[167] P. Andersson, D. Nilsson, P.O. Svensson, M. Chen, A. Malmstr¨om, T. Remonen, 
T. Kugler, M. Berggren, Active matrix displays based on all-organic 
electrochemical smart pixels printed on paper, Adv. Mater. 14 (2002) 1460–1464, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-4095(20021016)14:20<1460::AID- 
ADMA1460>3.0.CO;2-S. 
[168] T. Someya, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Kato, H. Kawaguchi, T. Sakurai, A large-area, 
flexible pressure sensor matrix with organic field-effect transistors for artificial 
skin applications, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 (2004) 9966–9970. 〈htt 
ps://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0401918101〉. 
[169] A.M. Pappa, V.F. Curto, M. Braendlein, X. Strakosas, M.J. Donahue, M. Fiocchi, G. 
G. Malliaras, R.M. Owens, Organic transistor arrays integrated with finger- 
powered microfluidics for multianalyte saliva testing, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5 
(2016) 2295–2302, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201600494.  
Zixuan Lu is a PhD candidate in the BioElectronic Systems 
Technologies group in the Department of Chemical Engineer­
ing and Biotechnology at the University of Cambridge. He 
received his Bachelor’s degree in Material Science and Engi­
neering from University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and 
Master’s degree in Nanomaterials from Imperial College Lon­
don. His research interests are on understanding and devel­
oping organic bioelectronics based on conjugated polymer 
with mixed ionic/electronic conducting properties for in vitro 
applications. His current work focuses on integrating native 
cell membranes with organic electronics for drug screening 
purposes.  
Aimie Pavia completed her PhD at the department of Bio­
electronics at the Ecole des Mines de St. Etienne co-funded by 
Panaxium. There, Aimie was working on development of novel 
methods for fabrication of organic bioelectronic devices for 
interfacing with biological tissues in vitro and in vivo. She is 
now a research scientist at Panaxium, specialized in preclinical 
expertise and collaboration for neural bioelectronic interfaces.  
Achilleas Savva is a Marie Curie Fellow in the BioElectronic 
Systems Technologies group in the Department of Chemical 
Engineering and Biotechnology at the University of Cambridge. 
He is a Chemical Engineer with a Ph.D. in Materials Science 
and Engineering. His research interests are focused on the 
understanding of mixed ionic/ electronic conduction in con­
jugated polymers as well as on the development of bio­
electronic devices for electrical and optical interaction with 
living systems. He is currently aiming to develop electroactive 
3D bioelectronic platforms to monitor and control stem cell 
proliferation and differentiation with electrical and optical 
cues.  
Loïg Kergoat is the CoreTech Lead for Panaxium, responsible for 
finding and developing new iontronic devices to treat brain dis­
orders. Prior to joining Panaxium in 2018, Loig was a post­
doctoral researcher at the Institut de Neurosciences des Syst`emes 
at the Aix-Marseille University, where he developed devices to 
record brain activity between 2016 and 2018. Before that, he was 
a Marie Sklodowska-Curie postdoctoral fellow in the Laboratory 
of Organic Electronics at the University of Link¨oping in Sweden 
from 2011 until 2015. He developed organic electronic devices 
able to sense and deliver neurotransmitters in brain tissue. Loïg 
earned a PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from the University of 
Paris Diderot in 2010.  
R´oisín M. Owens is Professor of Bioelectronics in the 
Department of ́ Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology at the 
University of Cambridge and a Fellow of Newnham College. 
Her research centers on application of organic electronic ma­
terials for monitoring biological systems in vitro, with a spe­
cific interest in enhancing the biological complexity and 
adapting the electronics to be fit for purpose. She currently 
serves as co-investigator and co-director for the EPSRC CDT in 
Sensor Technologies, renewed in 2019. She is a 2019 laureate 
of the Suffrage Science award. In 2020, she became Scientific 
Editor for Materials Horizons (RSC). Her work has been cited 
more than 5000 times. 
Z. Lu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

