Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Peculiar transient behaviors of organic
electrochemical transistors governed by ion
injection directionality
Ji Hwan Kim
1,6, Roman Halaksa2,6, Il-Young Jo1, Hyungju Ahn3,
Peter A. Gilhooly-Finn2, Inho Lee4, Sungjun Park
4,5, Christian B. Nielsen
2
&
Myung-Han Yoon1
Despite the growing interest in dynamic behaviors at the frequency domain,
there exist very few studies on molecular orientation-dependent transient
responses of organic mixed ionic–electronic conductors. In this research, we
investigated the effect of ion injection directionality on transient electro-
chemical transistor behaviors by developing a model mixed conductor system.
Two polymers with similar electrical, ionic, and electrochemical characteristics
but distinct backbone planarities and molecular orientations were successfully
synthesized by varying the co-monomer unit (2,2’-bithiophene or phenylene)
in conjunction with a novel 1,4-dithienylphenylene-based monomer. The
comprehensive electrochemical analysis suggests that the molecular orienta-
tion affects the length of the ion-drift pathway, which is directly correlated
with ion mobility, resulting in peculiar OECT transient responses. These results
provide the general insight into molecular orientation-dependent ion move-
ment characteristics as well as high-performance device design principles with
ﬁne-tuned transient responses.
Organic mixed ionic–electronic conductors (OMIECs) are a promising
class of materials suitable for non-conventional applications such as
bioelectronics1–4, neuromorphic transistors5–7, and bio-fuel cells8,
where both ionic and electronic conduction play critical roles. For
these purposes, application-speciﬁc characteristics should be incor-
porated into OMIECs in combination with prominent ionic and elec-
tronic conductivities, for instance, high sensitivity/selectivity of target
analytes, functional groups for tethering enzymes/mediators, and
appropriate responses to high frequency input signals. Accordingly,
the development of methods for evaluating such characteristics is as
important as designing/synthesizing advanced OMIECs with improved
ﬁgure-of-merits (i.e., μC*). One of the very effective device platforms
for characterizing the comprehensive conduction of ions and
electrons/holes is organic electrochemical transistor (OECT)9–11. The
channel conductivity of an OECT device is modulated by the gate-bias-
induced ion migration through the active layer, which is in direct
contact with electrolytes. During the channel conductivity modula-
tion, various parameters such as charge carrier mobility, ion mobility,
ion–polymer backbone coupling efﬁciency, and solvent-induced
swelling in the channel region determine the ion/electron transduc-
tion efﬁciency.
Various types of OMIECs have been intensively investigated using
the OECT platform or the OECT device combined with other probing
techniques, and it has been suggested that the direction12, length13,
symmetry of side chain14, the molecular structure of polymer
backbone15,
and
ﬁlm
crystallinity-related
factors
affect
the
Received: 3 May 2023
Accepted: 24 October 2023
Check for updates
1School of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. 2Department of
Chemistry, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, UK. 3Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Pohang 37673, Republic of Korea. 4Department of
Intelligence Semiconductor Engineering, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, Republic of Korea. 5Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ajou
University, Suwon 16499, Republic of Korea. 6These authors contributed equally: Ji Hwan Kim, Roman Halaksa.
e-mail: c.b.nielsen@qmul.ac.uk;
mhyoon@gist.ac.kr
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

corresponding OECT characteristics16–18. These studies not only
showed new phenomena such as electrolyte-mediated swelling in the
OECT channel but also the veriﬁcation of existing principles originally
derived from organic ﬁeld-effect transistors, organic photovoltaics,
and organic light-emitting diodes. Recently, several in situ OECT stu-
dies dealing with volumetric expansion by water molecules and ionic
species have demonstrated the effect of side chain and backbone
structures of OMIECs on OECT behaviors by systematically introdu-
cing molecular design variations19–24. It has been reported that the
crystallographic features induced by molecular structural factors sig-
niﬁcantly affect various OECT characteristics25–28. Nonetheless, the
majority of these studies have mainly focused on the relation between
structural properties and steady-state device characteristics (e.g.,
charge carrier mobility, volumetric capacitance, μC*), while there exist
only a few reports on their inﬂuence on transient characteristics which
are critical for rapid responses and/or frequency-dependent features
in special applications such as neural interfaces, neuromorphic tran-
sistors, drug delivery devices. Recently, Rivnay and coworkers have
reported the time-resolved structural change in highly crystallized
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(sytrenesulfonate)
(PED-
OT:PSS) ﬁlms under electrical bias29; however, they mainly focused on
the fundamental aspects of this phenomenon rather than the general
method for evaluating transient characteristics of a given OMIEC.
In this research, two 1,4-dithienylphenylene(DTP)-based polymers
with four triethylene-glycol side chains per repeating unit were suc-
cessfully synthesized to investigate the correlation between backbone
planarity-dependent molecular orientation and transient OECT char-
acteristics. The microstructural, optical, and electrochemical proper-
ties of each DTP polymer ﬁlm were examined by grazing incidence
wide angle X-ray diffraction (GIWAXD), ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis)
spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry (CV), and spectroelectrochemical
analysis to investigate the effect of the molecular structure and
orientation of the polymer backbone on optical and electrochemical
properties. An orthogonal patterning process using cyclic transparent
optical polymer (CYTOPTM) was employed to protect the active chan-
nel layer during the OECT fabrication, and the corresponding device
characteristics such as transconductance, μC* and hole mobility were
extracted. Simultaneously, volumetric capacitances at different offset
voltages were measured through electrochemical impedance spec-
troscopy (EIS), revealing the correlation between the chemical/
electrochemical properties of the DTP-based polymers and the cor-
responding
OECT
characteristics.
Furthermore,
the
molecular
orientation-dependent ion mobilities and transient responses of these
polymers were investigated by moving front and transient frequency-
dependent measurements, while these results were interpreted along
with the microstructural analysis based on X-ray diffraction. In parallel,
a different patterning method was introduced for controlled ion
injection into the active layer of OECT in order to verify that the ion
injection direction relative to the molecular orientation in the active
channel layer is the key factor in determining transient behaviors of
OMIECs.
Results
Structural characterizations
Figure 1a shows a schematic representation of ionic−electronic mixed
conducting polymers. In general, the conjugated hydrophobic poly-
mer backbone facilitates the transport of electrons or holes, while the
hydrophilic glycol side chains attached to the polymer backbone
facilitate ion/water molecule penetration into the polymeric ﬁlm. This
allows for an alternating structure of hydrophilic and hydrophobic
regions in a polymeric ﬁlm, and makes the orientation of the polymer
backbone a critical factor for ion migration in OMIECs. Figure 1b shows
the molecular structures of the DTP-based semiconducting polymers
with phenylene (DTP-P) and 2,2’-bithiophene (DTP-2T) as co-monomer
units. The DTP unit was developed as a highly soluble and hydrophilic
moiety due to its four triethyleneglycol side chains while also
embedding a high degree of structural planarity around the con-
jugated motif due to favorable S-O interactions between the ﬂanking
thiophenes and the central doubly glycolated phenylene unit. As dis-
cussed further in detail in the Supporting Information, the DTP-
monomer with four triethylene glycol side chains was synthesized
from readily available starting materials in three steps with an overall
yield of 32%. Subsequent Pd-catalyzed direct arylation reactions with
1,4-dibromobenzene and 5,5’-dibromo-2,2’-bithiophene provided DTP-
P and DTP-2T, respectively (Fig. 1b); the direct arylation protocol was
chosen over Stille polymerization due to its reduced number of syn-
thetic steps, better atom efﬁciency and more benign reaction
conditions30. The crude polymers were puriﬁed by Soxhlet extractions
with hexane, methanol, and acetone. Thereafter, chloroform was used
to isolate the puriﬁed materials with weight-average molecular weights
a
b
Fig. 1 | Molecular structural characteristics of DTP-based mixed
ionic–electronic conducting polymers. a Schematic illustration of a general
molecular structure of mixed ionic–electronic conducting polymers with glycol
side chains. b Chemical structures of DTP-based mixed ionic–electronic con-
ducting polymers (DTP-P and DTP-2T).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
2

of 42 kg mol−1 (dispersity 1.9) and 45 kg mol−1 (dispersity 2.8) for DTP-P
and DTP-2T, respectively31.
Based on the structural analysis below, the edge-on orientation is
dominant in the DTP-P ﬁlm, while the face-on orientation is dominant
in the DTP-2T ﬁlm (Fig. 2a). The choice of the co-monomer unit and the
resulting difference in the planarity of each polymer backbone results
in the orientational difference of the polymer backbone, which is
supported by dihedral angle analysis using density functional theory
(DFT) calculations (Supplementary Fig. 1). The phenylene co-monomer
unit causes a signiﬁcant backbone twist owing to steric crowding from
the phenyl hydrogens interfering with the adjacent glycolated thio-
phene units. On the other hand, the bithiophene co-monomer adapts a
signiﬁcantly more coplanar conformation due to the smaller ring size,
fewer space-ﬁlling hydrogens, and favorable S-O interactions which
promote the coplanar s-trans conformation across all thiophene-
thiophene couplings along the polymer backbone. These factors tend
to govern the polymer solubility and polymer chain interactions dur-
ing crystallite growth upon solution deposition and eventually crys-
tallite orientation relative to the underlying substrate, that is, less
coplanar DTP-P with an edge-on orientation and more coplanar DTP-
2T with a face-on orientation, which is in agreement with similar
observations for related conjugated systems32–34. In addition, this
orientational difference became signiﬁcantly more pronounced in the
GIWAXD patterns of spin-coated DTP ﬁlms (Fig. 2b, c). The π–π
stacking peaks at higher q value in the out-of-plane are observed for
DTP-2T, while lamellar stacking peaks were observed out-of-plane for
DTP-P, suggesting the dominant molecular orientation of DTP-2T and
DTP-P is face-on and edge-on, respectively (Fig. 2d). Interestingly, at
lower q value in the in-plane, diffraction peaks were found corre-
sponding to spacings of 19.5 and 15.3 Å for DTP-2T and DTP-P,
respectively (Fig. 2e). It is straightforward to assign the in-plane peak
observed from the DTP-2T as (100), while the in-plane peak of DTP-P
does not match the lamellar peak distance obtained from the out-of-
plane measurements. This in-plane peak is instead attributed to the
polymer repeat unit length (001), based on the previous literature35.
Therefore, it is not relevant to the dominant molecular orientation of
the polymer ﬁlm. In the 2D GIWAXD pattern of both DTP-2T and DTP-P,
a broad peak corresponding to a spacing of ~4.2 Å was observed,
indicating the presence of SiO2 substrate36
. We also compared the pole
ﬁgures of two polymers (Supplementary Fig. 2) and concluded that
DTP-P exhibit mixed orientations, but the edge-on feature is rather
dominant over the face-on feature.
Electrochemical characterizations
As shown in the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 3a) and Table 1, the
absorption maxima of both the DTP polymers revealed a red shift of
~30 nm and the appearance of vibronic splitting from 0–0 and 0–1
optical transitions after ﬁlm formation. These suggest the formation of
an aggregated polymer backbone after spin-casting of the polymer
solution. In addition, DTP-2T showed a higher absorption onset owing
to the additional thiophene moieties in the polymer repeating unit.
The red shift in the case of DTP-2T and the narrower optical band gap
of DTP-2T compared to that of DTP-P are attributed to the stronger
quinoidal contribution from thiophene, resulting in a higher degree of
planarity and thus a longer effective conjugation length37. The cyclic
voltammograms (CV) obtained from each polymer ﬁlm in a 0.1 M NaCl
aqueous solution are shown in Fig. 3b. Both DTP polymers can be
oxidized and reduced in aqueous electrolytes, which is evident from
the anodic and cathodic waves represented in CV (Fig. 3b). Ionization
potentials (IPs) were estimated from the onset of oxidation in the
cyclic voltammograms of polymer ﬁlms with 0.1 M TBAPF6 in acet-
onitrile as supporting electrolytes. DTP-2T has an IP of ~4.20 eV,
whereas DTP-P has a higher IP of ~4.44 eV (Fig. 3c and Supplementary
Fig. 3). The DFT calculations of the highest occupied molecular orbital
(HOMO) energy levels were in good agreement with the data obtained
from the CV (Supplementary Fig. 4). It is noteworthy that upon doping,
the current density of DTP-2T becomes signiﬁcantly higher than thatof
DTP-P. This is possibly attributed to the fact that the proportion of
electroactive polymer backbone (relative to the side chains) is higher
in DTP-2T than in DTP-P which can be rationalized by considering one
polymer repeat unit with four triethylene glycol side chain across ﬁve
aromatic rings in DTP-2T (averaging 0.8 side chain per aromatic unit)
and four aromatic units in DTP-P (1 side chain per aromatic unit).
Furthermore, the electron-rich thiophene group is beneﬁcial for
charge storage when ions compensate for the charges of the polymer
backbone.
-1
a
b
c
Å
Å-1
d
e
Å
Å
Å
Fig. 2 | Crystallographic microstructural analysis of DTP-based mixed ionic
−electronic conducting polymers (DTP-P and DTP-2T). a XRD patterns of DTP-P
and DTP-2T ﬁlms. The insets illustrate the dominant molecular orientations of DTP-
P and DTP-2T, that is, edge-on, and face-on, respectively, relative to a substrate. 2D
GIWAXD pattern images of spin-coated b DTP-2T and c DTP-P. GIWAXD d out-of-
plane (qz) and e in-plane (qxy) line-cut proﬁles of DTP-2T and DTP-P ﬁlms. The 1D
line-cut proﬁles were obtained from the 2D GIWAXD regions deﬁned by dashed
white boxes.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
3

Spectroelectrochemistry was used to compare the oxidation
characteristics of the polymers. Figure 3d, e show the spectro-
electrochemical analysis of the DTP-2T and DTP-P thin ﬁlms, respec-
tively. Both polymers showed an electrochromic response during the
potential sweep from −0.2 to 0.8 V versus Ag/AgCl. For DTP-2T, from
0.1 V, the gradual suppression of the π–π* transition peak accom-
panied by the appearance of an absorption peak around 780 nm is
attributed to polaron formation. Further increasing the potential to
0.7 V decreased the polaron absorption intensity, which could be
explained by the formation of bipolaron represented by longer
wavelength absorption38. A bias of −0.2 V was re-applied to conﬁrm the
reversibility of the doping process. The absorption intensity of the
π–π* transition was fully restored, indicating that there was no
degradation during the electrochemical cycling of the polymer.
Identical measurements were conducted on DTP-P, and the whole
doping process was reproduced except for the oxidation starting
potential, which was 0.3 V (Fig. 3f) in the case of DTP-P, due to the
difference in the HOMO level of each polymer. This reproducible
stable electrochromic behavior suggests that these polymers are sui-
table for OECTs to modulate the electronic current using doping/
dedoping cycling induced by ionic current.
Steady-state OECT performance
Microchannel OECTs of dimensions 80 μm × 20 μm were fabricated
using a orthogonal patterning process without the parylene patterning
process, which is a common method for OECT fabrication14,19,39,40. The
detailed procedure for OECT fabrication can be found in the Supple-
mentary Fig. 5. All devices were characterized without further
annealing, while 0.1 M NaCl aqueous electrolyte and a Ag/AgCl elec-
trode as the gate electrode were employed. All parameters relevant to
the OECT devices, such as OECT active layer thickness (d), transcon-
ductance (gm), volumetric capacitance (C*), OECT mobility (μOECT),
threshold voltage (VTh), μC* product, and on/off current ratio are
summarized in Table 2. Detailed measurement procedures are also
provided in the Supporting Information (Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7).
The μC* values estimated from the orthogonally patterned devices
were comparable to those of the parylene-patterned devices while
their variations are within the standard deviation (Supplementary
a
c
d
e
f
b
Fig. 3 | Electrochemical characterizations of DTP-2T and DTP-P ﬁlms. a UV-vis
absorption spectra of DTP-2T and DTP-P in a chloroform solution and as thin ﬁlms
prepared by spin casting. b Cyclic voltammograms of the DTP-2T and DTP-P thin
ﬁlms recorded in a 0.1 M NaCl(aq) electrolyte with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1.
c Ionization potentials (bottom) and electron afﬁnities (top, estimated from
ionization potential and optical band gap) in eV for DTP-2T and DTP-P. Spectro-
electrochemical analysis results of d DTP-2T and e DTP-P using a 0.1 M NaCl(aq)
electrolyte. f Normalized absorbance of π–π* transition and polaron peak obtained
from DTP-2T and DTP-P polymer ﬁlms with different offset voltages.
Table 1 | Optoelectronic properties of DTP-2T and DTP-P
Polymer
Eox,aq (V)a
IP (eV)
λmax,soln (nm)b
λmax,ﬁlm (nm)c
Eg,opt (eV)d
DTP-2T
0.06
4.20
512
545
1.95
DTP-P
0.36
4.44
470
501
2.18
a0.1 M solution of NaCl in H2O used as electrolyte.
bMeasured in chloroform.
cRecorded while applying 0 V.
dCalculated from the onset of absorption.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
4

Fig. 6). It is noteworthy that the newly synthesized OMIECs can be
incorporated into the OECTs fabricated using the solution-based
CYTOP patterning method even when the vacuum-based parylene
coater is not available for patterning the OMIEC channel layer which is
typically not compatible with the conventional photolithography
process.
The representative output curves and saturation-regime transfer
curves of all OECT devices were plotted as shown in Supplementary
Fig. 8. All devices showed typical p-type accumulation mode opera-
tion, indicating that the channel conductivity, which is generally low
due to the semiconducting nature of the polymers, was increased as
ions were injected into the channel; thus, the conjugated cores of the
polymers were doped9. With a very low gate leakage current level, the
transfer curves indicate comparable on-current values in the doped
state for two polymers. The threshold voltage (VTh) difference between
the two polymers was ~0.13 V, which also reﬂects the order of the
measured oxidation potentials of the polymers. For each polymer, the
transconductance (gm), that is, the rate of change in ID with VG, is
plotted in Supplementary Fig. 8c. It can be seen that the highest gm
values were obtained at a gate voltage (VG) = –0.8 V. Aqueous elec-
trolyte limits the voltage window to less than –0.8 V due to the elec-
trolysis of water; hence, the VG sweep range cannot be exceeded over
the VG range showing peak gm value. Nonetheless, we took the highest
gm value to obtain the ﬁgure of merit for comparing OMIECs after
conﬁrming that the gm values of both polymers at VG –0.8 V were
sufﬁciently saturated (Supplementary Fig. 9). For fair comparison, the
gm values should be normalized by a geometrical factor and biasing
condition because gm is obtained from the product of both these
factors, as shown in Eq. 1.
gm = ∂ID
∂V G
= μC* Wd
L ðV G  V ThÞ
ð1Þ
where ∂ID is the differential source-drain current, ∂VG is the
corresponding source-gate voltage differential, μ is the electronic
charge carrier mobility, C* is the volumetric capacitance, W is the
channel width, d is the channel thickness, L is the channel length, VTh is
the threshold voltage, and VG is the gate voltage. By fabricating OECTs
with channel lengths varying from 20 to 80 μm and plotting the
corresponding gm values as a function of (Wd/L)(VG −VTh) (Figs. S8d
and S10), it was found that DTP-2T and DTP-P have very similar ﬁgure-
of-merit (μC*) values.
To decouple C* and hole mobility (μh), EIS measurements were
conducted for both the polymers. By ﬁtting the impedance data to an
R(RC) circuit, the capacitancevalue of each polymer was obtained from
a Bode plot at different offset voltages (Voffset). Thereafter, C* was
obtained by dividing the capacitance value by the nominal volume of
the polymer ﬁlm for EIS measurement. Supplementary Fig. 8e shows
that C* increases and saturates as Voffset changes from –0.4 to 0.8 V,
representing the doping of the semiconducting polymers. The highest
C* values of DTP-2T and DTP-P were 166 and 113 F cm−3, respectively.
Finally, the OECT mobility was decoupled from the μC* value, and DTP-
P
showed
higher
hole
mobility
(0.61 cm2 V−1 s−1)
than
DTP-2T
(0.39 cm2 V−1 s−1)
(Supplementary
Fig.
8f).
Considering
electro-
chemicaldoping/dedoping minimally affected the dominant molecular
orientations in these polymer ﬁlms31, this trend could be attributed to
the edge-on dominant mixed orientations in DTP-P, which is still
favorable for lateral charge transport compared with the predominant
face-on orientation37,41,42. Although the μC* values of these two poly-
mers are similar, the molecular orientations of these two polymers are
very different (i.e., edge-on dominant DTP-P vs. face-on dominant DTP-
2T), which suggests that these two polymers are the best model system
to investigate the effect of molecular orientation on the transient
response of OECTs while the overall ﬁgure-of-merits remain similar.
Ion mobility and transient OECT characteristics
To investigate the effect of molecular orientation on the dynamic
response of OMIECs, we conducted moving front experiments which
are well known for determining the one-dimensional ion mobility in
mixed conducting polymer ﬁlms. As shown in Fig. 4a, the mixed
conducting polymer layers were deposited on a glass substrate and
passivated by photoresist to prevent vertical ion injection. Moreover,
the NaCl electrolyte and polymer ﬁlm formed a planar junction for the
lateral injection of ions. A short movie clip was recorded while
applying the voltage, and several time spot images showing time-
dependent color change were obtained. The corresponding movie
clips from the moving front experiments of DTP-P and DTP-2T can be
found in Supplementary Movies 1 and 2, respectively. The intensity
proﬁle of each image was determined using ImageJ software and
plotted as shown in Fig. 4b. In the intensity proﬁle plot, the color
change front is represented as a drastic intensity change; therefore,
the time-dependent position of the color change front can be obtained
by extrapolating the slope of the drastic intensity change and calcu-
lating the x-intercept of the extrapolated line. The distance from the
initial position of the color change was plotted as a function of time
(Fig. 4c). The ionic velocities of DTP-2T and DTP-P were 17.4 and
1.8 μm s−1, respectively. Finally, the ion mobility was obtained using the
following equation that describes the relationship between the
applied electric ﬁeld and the velocity of the ion:
vion = μionE
ð2Þ
where vion is the velocity of the ion, μion is the ion mobility, and E is the
electric ﬁeld applied throughout the channel of the “moving front”
experimental setup. The measured ion mobility of DTP-2T was
approximately 10 times higher than that of DTP-P (Fig. 4d). This
clearly indicates that the face-on orientation is highly advantageous for
ion drift in lateral direction (ion drift in parallel with the lamellar
stacking direction [100]) throughout the mixed conducting polymer
ﬁlm compared with the edge-on orientation (ion drift in parallel with
the π–π stacking direction [010]).
Another way to demonstrate the dynamic response of the OMIECs
is transient behavior measurement under a constant gate voltage. As
shown in Fig. 4e, we used a function generator to apply a gate voltage
pulse, and then the transient response of the drain current was mea-
sured using a source meter, current preampliﬁer, and data acquisition
system. In the transient response measurement, the geometry of active
layer is important factor affecting transient response (Fig. 4f, left
panel). As shown in the middle panel of Fig. 4f, the ions can be injected
through the whole surface of active layer except the bottom surface,
Table 2 | Steady-state OECT performance
Polymer
d (nm)
gm (μS)
C*a (F cm−3)
μOECT
b (cm2 V−1 s−1)
VTh (V)
μC*c (F V−1 cm−1 s−1)
Current on/off
DTP-2T
101 ± 2
41 ± 2
166 ± 15
0.39
−0.50 ± 0.01
65 ± 11
~103
DTP-P
165 ± 2
19 ± 4
113 ± 12
0.61
−0.63 ± 0.01
71 ± 10
~103
aValues calculated from the Bode plot obtained from EIS measurements.
bCalculated by dividing the μC* values with the respective C* values.
cAverage value obtained from ﬁve different channels from the slope of gm as a function of (Wd/L)(VTh −VG).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
5

which is substrate−active layer interface. The active layer geometry
also affects the ion injection depth depending on the ion injection
direction (right panel of Fig. 4f). Therefore, the OECT devices for
transient and frequency response studies were fabricated with com-
parable active layer thickness (DTP-2T: 43 ± 5 nm, DTP-P: 52 ± 5 nm) in
order to minimize the effect of active layer thickness on resultant
device characteristics for fair comparison (Fig. 4g). The results showed
that there was a small difference in the transient response of the drain
current (Fig. 4h, i, Supplementary Fig. 11, and Supplementary Table 1)
for the DTP-P and DTP-2T active layers. For quantitative comparison of
this transient response, the rise time constant was obtained by ﬁtting
with an exponential decay function, as described by the equation
below:
ID tð Þ = ID,0 + A × expðt=τÞ
ð3Þ
where ID(t) represents the ID at time t after applying the gate bias, ID,0
represents the initial ID before applying the gate bias, A is a constant,
and τ is the time constant. The rise time constants for DTP-2T and DTP-
P were estimated to be 1.8 and 0.9 ms, respectively. These results
demonstrate that the transient response measurement is effective for
examining the ion drift behavior considering that the time scale of ion
drift is too fast to be observed by conventional (steady-state) cyclic
voltammetry and spectroelectrochemistry.
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
k
h
i
j
Fig. 4 | Ionic mobility and transient behaviors of DTP-2T and DTP-P ﬁlms.
a Schematic illustration of the moving front experiment to obtain ion mobility.
While applying bias, the propagation of the dedoping front was recorded through
time-lapse imaging of the DTP-2T and DTP-P ﬁlms. b One-dimensional normalized-
intensity proﬁles as a function of distance from the electrolyte–polymer interface
(from t = 0 to 6.6 min) are obtained from the time-lapse images. c Distance from the
electrolyte–polymer interface obtained from each intensity proﬁle at certain point
of time. The slope of each graph represents the drift velocity of ions in DTP-2T and
DTP-P. d Plot of ion mobility in the DTP-2T and DTP-P ﬁlms. The measurements
were performed using more than ﬁve devices as each set. e Schematic illustration of
transient and frequency responses setup. f Schematic deﬁnition of the geometrical
parameters in the OECT active layer. W, d, and L denote the width, thickness and
length of the active layer, respectively. Middle panel shows the ion injection area of
active layer. Pink colored area represents the ion injection area, which is active layer
surface. Right panel shows the ion injection depth of active layer. Pink arrow
represents the depth of ion injection depending on the ion injection direction.
g Thickness of active layer in OECT for transient measurement. Thickness values
were obtained by measuring more than ﬁve devices for each set. h Transient
response of the drain current at a constant VD of –0.6 V and a square voltage pulse
of 5 s (VG = –0.8 V) at the gate electrode. i Initial time range of transient response of
the drain current. j Plot of frequency-dependent normalized transconductance
obtained from frequency response measurements at VD = –0.6 V. A sine gate vol-
tage pulse is applied at the gate electrode using a function generator. k Plot of rise
time constant obtained from transient response (left y-axis) and the plot of trans-
conductance obtained by the application of VG sine wave at a frequency of 100 Hz
(right y-axis). Transconductance values were obtained from more than ﬁve devices
for each set.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
6

For the more cautious comparison, the geometry-normalized
time constants43 were calculated by dividing τ with d(WL)1/2 to elim-
inate the possible effect of geometrical factor difference such as
active layer thickness and ion injection area by considering that τ is
proportional to d(WL)1/2. The normalized time constant values for
DTP-2T
and
DTP-P
were
calculated
as
9.8 ± 1.7 × 108
and
5.3 ± 0.3 × 108 s m−2, respectively, showing opposite trend observed
from ionic mobility results. This can be explained by the ion injection
direction of each device. Considering the OECT devices (Fig. 4f), the
ions are injected into the mixed conducting polymer ﬁlm from the
whole surface of the ﬁlm, except for the bottom surface. However,
the ions in the “moving front” experiment (Fig. 4a) are injected from
the side wall of the polymer ﬁlm (lower right panel of Fig. 4f).
Therefore, the vertical ion injection is dominant for these OECTs,
while the lateral ion injection is dominant in the case of “moving
front” devices due to the difference in ion injection direction. This
reveals that the ion injection is signiﬁcantly faster when the ion
injection direction is in parallel with the lamellar stacking direction
[100]. The frequency response results also support the concept of
ion-injection-direction-dependency. As demonstrated in Fig. 4j, the
gm of the OECTs was maintained until the cut-off frequency was
reached, at which gm starts to decay abruptly. To quantitatively
compare the frequency responses of DTP-2T and DTP-P, the gm
values of each polymer at a frequency of 100 Hz were compared
(Fig. 4k, column graph). The gm values of DTP-2T and DTP-P were
reduced to 36% and 63%, respectively, of the corresponding gm
values calculated at a frequency of 0.1 Hz, verifying that the dynamic
behavior of DTP-P is signiﬁcantly faster than that of DTP-2T in this
device conﬁguration. Because the OECT device conﬁguration in
which vertical ion injection is dominant was used for the frequency
response measurement, the edge-on dominant mixed conducting
polymer DTP-P showed a faster ionic response than the face-on
oriented DTP-2T polymer.
Molecular orientation-dependent transient behaviors
Although DTP-2T and DTP-P showed that ionic mobilities and
frequency-dependent transient behaviors of OECTs depend on the
direction of ion injection, there exists still the possibility of material-
dependent characteristics (e.g., molecular weight, relative crystal-
linity) regardless of the molecular orientation of OMIECs. Finally, dif-
ferent patterning methods were employed to demonstrate the
molecular orientation dependency of the transient behavior. As shown
in Fig. 5a, the parylene patterning and orthogonal (CYTOP) patterning
methods were employed for both DTP-2T and DTP-P. The schematic
representation of rather simpliﬁed molecular orientations in DTP-2T
and DTP-P ﬁlms is provided as the polymers take the designated pre-
ferential orientation for the better understanding of apparent charge/
ion transport in terms of the relation between molecular orientation
and ion injection direction. The detailed device fabrication procedure
of these devices is described in Supplementary Fig. 12. In the case of
the parylene patterning method, the side wall of the polymer ﬁlm is
blocked; hence, the ion injection direction is limited to the top of the
polymer ﬁlm. However, the CYTOP patterning method blocks the top
of the polymer ﬁlm (note that this is different from the CYTOP pat-
terning via orthogonal patterning employed for OECT fabrication in
Fig. 4); hence, the ion injection is limited to the side wall of the polymer
ﬁlm. Therefore, four types of devices, that is, DTP-2T device fabricated
by parylene patterning, DTP-2T device fabricated by CYTOP pattern-
ing, DTP-P device fabricated by parylene patterning, and DTP-P device
fabricated by CYTOP patterning methods, can be compared using
transient measurements to investigate the effect of ion injection
direction relative to molecular orientation. The thickness of DTP-2T
and DTP-P ﬁlms were set to 43 ± 5 and 52 ± 5 nm, respectively, with
relatively small difference, to minimize the possible effect of the side-
wall area on ion injection properties.
Figure 5b shows the transient response results of both the DTP-2T
and DTP-P devices fabricated through CYTOP patterning. The extrac-
ted rise time constant was higher in the case of the DTP-P device, which
has an edge-on dominant orientation, showing an opposite tendency
compared to the results obtained from the devices fabricated through
parylene patterning. The rise time constants of the ﬁve devices are
plotted in Fig. 5c, Supplementary Figs. 13 and 14, and Supplementary
Tables 2 and 3. In addition, the geometry-normalized time constant
values were calculated for fair comparison of transient behaviors to
eliminate the effect of ion injection area and depth. In case of the
devices fabricated through parylene patterning, the area of ion injec-
tion is limited to the top of the polymer ﬁlm, thus, the τ is proportional
to d(WL)1/2. In contrast, the CYTOP patterning method blocks the top
layer of the polymer ﬁlm, thus, the τ is proportional to [(WL)/2(W + L)]
[2d(L + W)]1/2 (Supplementary Fig. 15), because the time constant is
proportional to the product of channel thickness and the square root
of nominal channel surface area28. The DTP-2T and DTP-P devices
fabricated by parylene patterning showed the geometry-normalized τ
values of 9.9 ± 1.7 × 108 and 5.4 ± 0.3 × 108 s m−2, respectively, which
suggests the transient response of DTP-P device is faster (Fig. 5f). The
DTP-2T and DTP-P devices fabricated by CYTOP patterning showed the
geometry-normalized τ values of 5.7 ± 0.2 × 108 and 10 ± 1.6 × 108 s m−2,
respectively (Fig. 5f), revealing that this trend is opposite to those
patterned with parylene. Regarding ion injection constrained in two
distinct directions, the DTP-P-based OECT exhibits a faster geometry-
normalized transient response upon parylene patterning than upon
CYTOP patterning whereas the opposite is true for the DTP-2T-based
OECT. In the case of the DTP-P devices fabricated by CYTOP pattern-
ing, the ion injection direction, and thus, the ion injection efﬁciency is
not strictly opposed by the edge-on dominant molecular faces due to
their random in-plane orderings. Nonetheless, it is still obvious that
lateral ion injection into DTP-P devices patterned by CYTOP is more
frequently impeded than vertical ion injection into those patterned by
parylene due to the edge-on-dominant nature without in-plane
orderings (Fig. 5a lower panel; more detailed discussion is provided
in the next section). Therefore, it can be deduced that the transient
response is relatively fast when ions are vertically injected into edge-
on-dominant ﬁlms compared with that into face-on-dominant ﬁlms
(Fig. 5a left column), while the transient response is relatively slow
when ions are laterally injected into edge-on-dominant ﬁlms com-
pared with that into face-on-dominant ﬁlms (Fig. 5a right column). We
note that these geometry-normalized time constant values in this
study suggest that the molecular orientation is one of the important
factors inﬂuencing time constants. It is, however, not the only factor,
considering that paracrystallinity, crystallite size, and molecular
weight may affect the apparent capacitance and resistance of the ionic
circuit between the channel and the gate electrode and, thereby, the
extracted time constant values43. Decoupling all these effects on the
time constant value would be a future research theme worth exploring.
The further analysis was performed by conducting frequency-
response measurements. After obtaining the sine wave ID by applying a
sine wave VG, the gm values of each device from a certain frequency
region were obtained and are plotted in Fig. 5d. Both parylene-
patterned devices showed relatively high operational stability in the
high-frequency region regardless of the OMIECs. However, the CYTOP-
patterned devices showed drastic decrease of ~12% in the gm values
even at 0.2 Hz, which are very slow device operation conditions. For a
quantitative comparison of the frequency response of the four devi-
ces, the gm values obtained at 10 Hz instead of 100 Hz are plotted in
Fig. 5e because DTP-P device fabricated by CYTOP patterning did not
show meaningful gm values over 10 Hz. The DTP-P device fabricated by
parylene patterning showed the highest gm value of ~148 μS among the
four devices, followed by the DTP-2T device fabricated by parylene
patterning (~136 μS), DTP-2T device fabricated by CYTOP patterning
(~48 μS), and DTP-P device fabricated by CYTOP patterning (~2.7 μS).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
7

Additionally, we compared the geometry-normalized time constants
by using the cut-off frequency(fc) from the frequencyresponse results.
The DTP-2T and DTP-P devices fabricated by parylene patterning
exhibited geometry-normalized τ values of 8.9 × 107 and 1.1 × 107 s m−2,
respectively, which suggests that the transient response of the DTP-P
device is faster than that of DTP-2T device. In the case of CYTOP pat-
terning, DTP-2T and DTP-P devices exhibited geometry-normalized τ
values of 4.2 × 108 and 5.2 × 108 s m−2, respectively, manifesting that the
lateral ion injection is faster in the face-on dominant DTP-2T than the
edge-on dominant DTP-P. As demonstrated by the transient mea-
surements, the doping efﬁciency is higher when the ion injection
direction is in parallel with the lamellar stacking direction [100] (i.e.,
the higher the doping efﬁciency, the higher is the gm value). In addi-
tion, one more common feature observed from the two measurements
(i.e., transient and frequency responses) is that there are large differ-
ences in the obtained parameters between the parylene and CYTOP
devices, and these differences are up to an order of magnitude. This
can be attributed to the difference in the area of the interface between
the electrolyte and polymer ﬁlm in the two device structures. However,
the molecular orientation dependency was observed despite such
differences, with consistency for both devices fabricated using differ-
ent methods, demonstrating that the ion mobility depends on the ion
injection direction relative to the dominant molecular orientation of
the polymer.
Discussion
From the abovementioned results, we were able to discuss how ions
drift through the OMIEC ﬁlms with different molecular orientations.
First, we assumed three basic principles for the following discussion. (i)
There exist two distinct ion drift behaviors when ions encounter
crystallized domains, namely, inﬁltration through and bypassing
around crystalline domains but, in this research, the overall ion drift
through the π–π gap (i.e. in-between two pi-stacked polymer back-
bones) could be ignored due to the relatively large-size hydrated ions
(hydrated Cl−ions: ~7.24 Å, π–π distance: ~3.7 Å)19,25,44. (ii) The ions can
drift through the lamellar gap (the gap between polymer backbones
arranged along the (100) direction) due to the presence of hydrophilic
glycol side chains and the large distance of the lamellar gap. (iii) The
ion drift is the fastest in amorphous regions of the polymer ﬁlm
compared to that through the lamellar gap owing to the difference in
the glycol side-chain density. As shown in Fig. 6a, the ions exist inside
the OMIEC ﬁlms even under zero-bias conditions because of the
swelling promoted by the hydrophilic glycol side chains45. When a bias
is applied, the ions drift along with the bias polarity through the
b
c
d
e
a
f
Fig. 5 | Molecular-orientation-dependent transient behavior of DTP-2T and
DTP-P. a Schematic representation of OECT devices fabricated by different pat-
terning methods. Black arrows indicate ion injection direction when the gate bias is
applied to the OECT devices. The active material of the two devices on the top panel
(blue) represents a face-on dominant molecular orientation, and that of the two
devices on the bottom panel (red) represents an edge-on dominant molecular
orientation. b Transient response of the drain current at a constant VD of –0.6 V and
a square voltage pulse of 10 s (VG = –0.8 V) applied at the gate electrode. The
devices were fabricated by the CYTOP patterning method. c Plot of rise time
constant obtained from transient response of DTP-2T- and DTP-P-based OECTs
fabricated by parylene and CYTOP patterning methods. The measurements were
performed using more than ﬁve devices for each set. d Plot of frequency-
dependent normalized transconductance obtained from the frequency response
measurements of the DTP-2T- and DTP-P-based OECTs fabricated by parylene and
CYTOP patterning methods. Biasing condition was VD = –0.6 V, and sine wave VG
with varying frequency was used. e Transconductance obtained from the DTP-2T-
and DTP-P-based OECTs by the application of VG sine wave with a frequency of
10 Hz. Transconductance values were obtained from more than ﬁve devices for
each set. f Geometry-normalized τ obtained from the DTP-2T and DTP-P-based
OECTs fabricated by parylene and CYTOP patterning methods. τ values were
obtained from more than ﬁve devices and were normalized based on the channel
geometry measurements. The average thickness values, derived from measure-
ments of over ﬁve devices, were used for normalization.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
8

domain comprising glycol side chains (Fig. 6b). In addition, when the
applied bias is sufﬁciently high to dope the polymer chain, the ions
drift to the vicinity of the nearest polymer backbone to compensate for
the bias-induced charges, which occurs until the entire ﬁlm is doped
with all electronic charges compensated by ions from the electrolyte.
Figure 6b also shows the case of ions interacting with crystalline
domains during the drift. Under the bias condition of doping, when the
ions face a crystalline domain, the ions would draw close to the surface
of the crystalline domain and dope the nearest polymer backbone.
Despite ions’ inﬁltration, the drift velocity of ions through crystalline
domain is very low because the size of the hydrated ion is larger than
π–π stacking distance19,25,44. Therefore, if the nearest crystalline
domain is fully doped, we assume that the majority of ions move
around and dope the next nearest crystalline domain. Because of
this bypassing of the doped crystalline domains, the ion-drift pathway
becomes longer than that in a purely amorphous region. This depen-
dence of the ion-drift pathway on the polymer microstructure and
the existence of the amorphous and crystalline domains are
further affected by different molecular orientations of the crystalline
domains.
To deal with the different effects of the dominant molecular
orientation, we must consider the general structure of crystallized
polymeric materials. As shown in Supporting Information (Table S4),
the coherence lengths of the (100) and (001) planes are signiﬁcantly
longer than that of the (010) plane. Although the unit chain length of
DTP-2T is undiscernible due to the absence of (001) peak, it could be
inferred thatthe coherence length of (001) plane would be similar to or
longer than that of (100) plane by considering to the molecular
structure and previously reported literatures13–15,20,37,46–51. Therefore,
when the ion injection direction is in parallel with the π–π stacking
direction [010], the bypassing pathway of ions becomes signiﬁcantly
longer than when the ion injection direction is in parallel with the
lamellar stacking [100] or unit chain length [001] direction (Supple-
mentary Fig. 16 and Fig. 6d–g, see Fig. 6c for clear schematic repre-
sentation of ion injection direction). In the case of the DTP-P device
patterned with CYTOP (Fig. 6g), two possibilities of ion injection exist
due to the absence of in-plane ordering. However, the chance of ion
injection occurring in parallel with the π–π stacking direction (Fig. 6g
right) is much higher than that of ion injection occurring in parallel
with the unit chain length direction (Supplementary Fig. 17). Therefore,
we can conclude that in the case of the DTP-P device patterned with
CYTOP, the dominant ion injection direction is in parallel with the π–π
stacking direction [010]. This indicates that a longer ion drift pathway
results in a slower transient response of OECTs (Fig. 5f). Even if the
lamellar gap, which can be considered as a shortcut for ion drift, is
considered, the local ion mobility in the lamellar gap is lower than that
of the amorphous region. We expect that these trends will also be
observed in various organic mixed conductors with glycol side chains
with decent crystallinity and, therefore, our ﬁndings could be utilized
as a reference when investigating the molecular-orientation-transient
behavior correlation of mixed conductors or for establishing new
design rules for organic mixed conductors to carefully modulate
material properties for desired applications.
In summary, two DTP-based polymeric mixed conductors were
synthesized through direct arylation polymerization. Utilizing two
different co-monomer units, that is, phenylene and bithiophene, to
manipulate the degree of polymer backbone planarity allowed us to
control the dominant molecular orientation of the conducting poly-
mer backbone within crystalline domains relative to the substrate.
After investigating the optical and electrochemical properties of DTP-
2T and DTP-P, we found that the polymers have similar electro-
chemical performance in terms of OECT operation. This revealed that
the ionic/electronic transducing efﬁciencies are very similar despite
the difference in molecular orientation observed for the two systems.
In addition, we analyzed the effect of the molecular orientation of each
polymer on the ionic mobility and transient behavior of OECT devices
by fabricating the desired experimental platforms, including moving
front experiments, data acquisition setup, and function generator.
Finally, we demonstrated that the ion injection direction relative to the
molecular orientation of the polymer affects the length of the ion-drift
Fig. 6 | Schematic representations of OMIEC ﬁlm microstructures and the
mechanisms of orientation-dependent transient behavior. a Amorphous (low
crystallinity) OMIEC ﬁlm swollen by electrolyte. Only anions are displayed for
convenience. b Amorphous OMIEC ﬁlm under bias condition. The red arrows
represent the drift of anions. c Close-up of molecular packing within ordered
crystalline domain indicating the repeat directions. Ion-drift behaviors in OMIEC
crystalline domains with face-on orientation when the ion injection direction is
d vertical (parylene patterned) and e lateral (CYTOP patterned) to the OMIEC ﬁlm.
Ion-drift behaviors in OMIEC crystalline domains with edge-on orientation when
the ion injection direction is f vertical (parylene patterned) and g lateral (CYTOP
patterned) to the OMIEC ﬁlm.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
9

pathwayand OECT transient behavior through a new device patterning
method (i.e., orthogonal patterning) to limit the ion injection direction
and compare the transient and frequency responses of the devices. We
believe that this study demonstrates the dependency of ion injection
direction relative to molecular orientation exists in term of ion drift in
(semi)crystalline polymeric mixed conductors. Moreover, the knowl-
edge accumulated from this research can be a valuable reference for
future designs of organic mixed conductor materials, controlling the
molecular orientation of existing systems through optimization of
processing conditions, and designing new bioelectronic devices ben-
eﬁting from geometry-optimized conﬁgurations.
Methods
Chemicals
Chemicals were purchased from Acros Organics, Fluorochem, and TCI
and were used without further puriﬁcation. Solvents were HPLC grade
and were purchased from Honeywell and used without further
puriﬁcation.
Materials characterization
1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy were carried out on a Bruker AV400 or
Bruker AVIII400 spectrometers. Chemical shifts (δ) are quoted in ppm
relative to the residual solvent peak. d-CHCl3 was purchased from
Cambridge isotopes and d2-TCE was purchased from Fluorochem.
HRMS was carried out on Synapt G2-Si High Deﬁnition Mass
Spectrometer.
Computational details
All the compounds presented in the electronic structures were opti-
mized via B3LYP 6–311G(d,p) basis set.
Optical spectroscopy
UV-VIS spectroscopy and spectro-electrochemistry were carried out
using a Shimadzu UV3600 UV-vis-nIR spectrometer. Thin ﬁlms for UV-
VIS were prepared using Laurell Technologies WS-650Mz-23NPPB spin
coater.
Electrochemical analysis
Cyclic voltammetry was carried out using a PalmSens 3 electro-
chemical cell on glassy carbon electrode with Ag/Ag+ reference elec-
trode and platinum wire counter electrode.
Gel permeation chromatography
GPC was carried out using Shimadzu Prominence GPC system, com-
prised of a SIL-20A auto sampler, LC-20AT liquid chromatograph,
CTO-20A column oven, RID-20A refractive index detector and an SPD-
20A UV-Vis detector. HPLC grade chloroform stabilized with amylene
was purchased from Acros Organics. Analysis was carried out on Shi-
madzu’s LabSolutions software.
X-ray diffraction
For XRD spectra, the polymer ﬁlms prepared on Si substrates were
employed. The XRD spectra were collected using an X-ray dif-
fractometer (RigakuD/max-2500) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 c5) at
40 kV and 100 mA. Exposure time was set as 1 s and the background
peaks were subtracted.
Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray diffraction
GIWAXD measurements were conducted at the 9 A U-SAXS beamline
of the Pohang Light Source (PLS), Republic of Korea. All samples for
GIWAXD
were
prepared
by
drop-casting
of
polymer
solution
(5 mg mL−1) on p-Si++/SiO2 (300 nm) substrates. The substrate size was
15 mm × 15 mm while the thickness of polymer ﬁlm was set at ~50 nm.
The wavelength of X-rays was 1.12370 Å (E = 11.025 keV), and the inci-
dence angle of the beam light was ~0.1°. The size of the incident beam
was 60 μm × 298 μm (vertical and horizontal) at detector position, and
the divergence of the beam was 25/45 urad (vertical and horizontal).
Typical exposure time was ~12 s, and all measurements were con-
ducted in ambient conditions. The images from GIWAXD were
obtained with a 2D FT-CCD module of Rayonix MX170-HS, while the
sample-to-detector distance was adjusted to be 225 mm.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
For EIS measurement, all polymer ﬁlms were prepared on indium tin
oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates as working electrodes, while the
electrode surface other than the active electrode area was passi-
vated using epoxy glue and in contact with an electrolyte solution of
0.1 M NaCl in water. Electrochemical impedance spectra were
obtained using PGSTAT304N (Metrohm) equipped with a conven-
tional three-electrode system composed of a working electrode, an
Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and a Pt counter electrode, at the
frequency range between 0.1 and 105 Hz with a single sinusoidal
signal of Eac = 10 mV.
Ion mobility measurement
Moving front experiment was conducted by fabricating devices as
follows. Glass substrates were cleaned by ultrasonication, followed by
the electrode pattern deposition [Cr (5 nm)/Au (40 nm)] via conven-
tional photolithography. After polymer ﬁlms were prepared on the
glass substrate with patterned contact electrode, CYTOP layer was
fabricated on the polymer ﬁlm by spin-cast to protect polymer layer
from photoresist patterning process. A positive photoresist pattern
was prepared on the polymer ﬁlm with a channel length of 15 mm and a
width of 1.5 mm. The non-channel section which are not passivated
with the positive photoresist pattern was removed by dry etching.
After the removal of residual photoresist, GXR-601 photoresist was
spin-coated on top of the polymer ﬁlm to serve as an ion injection
barrier. The whole device areas except contact pads and the open
region for electrolyte/active layer junction were passivated with the
GXR601 layer. The contact pad was connected to the ground terminal
of the source meter and passivated by insulating epoxy (F-301, Alteco),
and open region for electrolyte contact was covered with the elec-
trolyte solution of 0.1 M NaCl in water which is in contact with sus-
pended Ag/AgCl electrode wire with a source meter unit. While the
dedoping of channel was in progress by applying an appropriate
positive bias to the Ag/AgCl electrode, the moving front was mon-
itored using a digital camera (Iphone 8, Apple).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All data generated in this study are available in the main text or
the
Supplementary
Materials.
Source
data
are
provided
with
this paper.
References
1.
Keene, S. T. et al. Wearable organic electrochemical transistor
patch for multiplexed sensing of calcium and ammonium ions from
human perspiration. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 8, 1901321 (2019).
2.
Cea, C. et al. Enhancement-mode ion-based transistor as a com-
prehensive interface and real-time processing unit for in vivo
electrophysiology. Nat. Mater. 19, 679–686 (2020).
3.
Venkatraman, V. et al. Subthreshold operation of organic electro-
chemical transistors for biosignal ampliﬁcation. Adv. Sci. 5,
1800453 (2018).
4.
Koklu, A. et al. Microﬂuidic integrated organic electrochemical
transistor with a nanoporous membrane for amyloid-β detection.
ACS Nano 15, 8130–8141 (2021).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
10

5.
Lee, S.-K. et al. Nanoﬁber channel organic electrochemical tran-
sistors for low-power neuromorphic computing and wide-
bandwidth sensing platforms. Adv. Sci. 8, 2001544 (2021).
6.
Ji, X. et al. Mimicking associative learning using an ion-trapping
non-volatile synaptic organic electrochemical transistor. Nat.
Commun. 12, 2480 (2021).
7.
Keene, S. T. et al. A biohybrid synapse with neurotransmitter-
mediated plasticity. Nat. Mater. 19, 969–973 (2020).
8.
Ohayon, D. et al. Biofuel powered glucose detection in bodily ﬂuids
with an n-type conjugated polymer. Nat. Mater. 19, 456–463 (2020).
9.
Bernards, D. A. & Malliaras, D. A. Steady-state and transient behavior
of organic electrochemical transistors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 17,
3538–3544 (2007).
10.
Nissa, J., Janson, P., Simon, D. T. & Berggren, M. Expanding the
understanding of organic electrochemical transistor function. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 118, 053301 (2021).
11.
Berggren, M. et al. Ion electron-coupled functionality in materials
and devices based on conjugated polymers. Adv. Mater. 31,
1805813 (2019).
12.
Hallani, R. K. et al. Regiochemistry-driven organic electrochemical
transistor performance enhancement in ethylene glycol-
functionalized polythiophenes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143,
11007–11018 (2021).
13.
Moser, M. et al. Ethylene glycol-based side chain length engineer-
ing in polythiophenes and its impact on organic electrochemical
transistor performance. Chem. Mater. 32, 6618–6628 (2020).
14.
Moser, M. et al. Side chain redistribution as a strategy to boost
organic electrochemical transistor performance and stability. Adv.
Mater. 32, 2002748 (2020).
15.
Moser, M. et al. Polaron delocalization in donor–acceptor polymers
and its impact on organic electrochemical transistor performance.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 7856–7864 (2021).
16.
Kim, S.-M. et al. Inﬂuence of PEDOT:PSS crystallinity and compo-
sition on electrochemical transistor performance and long-term
stability. Nat. Commun. 9, 3858 (2018).
17.
Rivnay, J. et al. Structural control of mixed ionic and electronic
transport in conducting polymers. Nat. Commun. 7, 11287 (2016).
18.
Kim, J. H. et al. Decoupling critical parameters in large-range
crystallinity-controlled polypyrrole-based high-performance
organic electrochemical transistors. Chem. Mater. 32,
8606–8618 (2020).
19.
Savva, A. et al. Inﬂuence of water on the performance of organic
electrochemical transistors. Chem. Mater. 31, 927–937 (2019).
20. Savva, A. et al. Balancing ionic and electronic conduction for high-
performance organic electrochemical transistors. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 30, 1907657 (2020).
21.
Flagg, L. Q., Giridharagopal, R., Guo, J. & Ginger, D. S. Anion-
dependent doping and charge transport in organic electrochemical
transistors. Chem. Mater. 30, 5380–5389 (2018).
22. Cendra, C. et al. Role of the anion on the transport and structure of
organic mixed conductors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1807034
(2019).
23. Nicolini, T. et al. A low-swelling polymeric mixed conductors
operating in aqueous electrolytes. Adv. Mater. 33, 2005723 (2021).
24. Gladisch, J. et al. Reversible electronic solid–gel switching of a
conjugated polymer. Adv. Sci. 7, 1901144 (2020).
25. Flagg, L. Q. et al. Polymer crystallinity controls water uptake in
glycol side-chain polymer organic electrochemical transistors. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 4345–4354 (2019).
26. Bischak, C. G. et al. A reversible structural phase transition by
electrochemically-driven ion injection into a conjugated polymer. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 7434–7442 (2020).
27.
Harris, J. K., Neelamraju, B. & Ratcliff, E. L. Intersystem subpopula-
tion charge transfer and conformational relaxation preceding in situ
conductivity in electrochemically doped poly(3-hexylthiophene)
electrodes. Chem. Mater. 31, 6870–6879 (2019).
28. Wu, X. et al. High performing solid-state organic electrochemical
transistors enabled by glycolated polythiophene and ion-gel elec-
trolyte with a wide operation temperature range from −50 to 110 °C.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 33, 2209354 (2023).
29. Paulsen, B. D. et al. Time-resolved structural kinetics of an organic
mixed ionic–electronic conductor. Adv. Mater. 32,
2003404 (2020).
30. Parr, Z. S. et al. Glycolated thiophene-tetraﬂuorophenylene copo-
lymers for bioelectrocnic applications: synthesis by direct hetero-
arylation polymerization. ChemPlusChem. 84, 1384–1390 (2019).
31.
R. Halaksa, R. et al. The inﬂuence of regiochemistry on the perfor-
mance of organic mixed ionic and electronic conductors. Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 62, e202304390 (2023).
32. Chen, M. S. et al. Control of polymer-packing orientation in thin
ﬁlms through synthetic tailoring of backcone coplanarity. Chem.
Mater. 25, 4088–4096 (2013).
33. Kim, H. G. et al. Synthetic tailoring of solid-state order in
diketopyrrolopyrrole-based copolymers via intramolecular non-
covalent interactions. Chem. Mater. 27, 829–838 (2015).
34. Son, S. Y., Park, T. & You, W. Understanding of face-on crystallites
transitioning to edge-on crystallites in thiphene-based conjugated
polymers. Chem. Mater. 33, 4541–4550 (2021).
35. Lin, R. et al. Spontaneous dissociation of a conjugated molecule on
the Si(100) surface. J. Chem. Phys. 117, 321–330 (2002).
36. Kraner, S., Koerner, C. & Leo, K. Dielectric function of a poly(-
benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) ladder polymer. Phys. Rev. B
Condens. Matter 91, 195202 (2015).
37. Nielsen, C. B. et al. Molecular design of semiconducting polymers
for high-performance organic electrochemical transistors. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 138, 10252–10259 (2016).
38. Bubnova, O., Berggren, M. & Crispin, X. Tuning the thermoelectric
properties of conducting polymers in an electrochemical transistor.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 16456–16459 (2012).
39. Rivnay, J. et al. High-performance transistors for bioelectronics
through tunning of channel thickness. Sci. Adv. 1, e1400251
(2015).
40. Khodagholy, D. et al. High transconductance organic electro-
chemical transistors. Nat. Commun. 4, 2133 (2013).
41.
Saito, M., Koganezawa, T. & Osaka, I. Understanding comparable
charge transport between edge-on and face-on polymers in a
thiazolothiazole polymer system. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 1,
1257–1262 (2019).
42. Dou, J.-H. et al. Systematic investigation of side-chain branching
position effect on electron carrier mobility in conjugated polymers.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 24, 6270–6278 (2014).
43. Friedlein, J. T., McLeod, R. R. & Rivnay, J. Device physics of organic
electrochemical transistors. Org. Electron. 63, 398–414 (2018).
44. Thomas, E. M. et al. X-ray scattering reveals ion-induced micro-
structural changes during electrochemical gating of poly(3-hex-
ylthiophen). Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1803687 (2018).
45. Flagg, L. Q. et al. A reversible structural phase transition by
electrochemically-driven ion injection into a conjugated polymer. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 7434–7442 (2020).
46. Giovannitti, A. et al. Energetic control of redox-active polymers
toward safe organic bioelectronics materials. Adv. Mater. 32,
1908047 (2020).
47. Giovannitti, A. et al. Controlling the mode of operation of organic
transistors through side-chain engineering. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 113, 12017–12022 (2016).
48. Steyrleuthner, R. et al. The role of regioregularity, crystallinity, and
chain orientation on electron transport in a high-mobility n-type
copolymer. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 4245–4256 (2014).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
11

49. Aubry, T. J. et al. Processing methods for obtaining a face-on
crystalline domain orientation in conjugated polymer-based pho-
tovoltaics. J. Phys. Chem. C 122, 15078–15089 (2018).
50. Hu, H. et al. Inﬂuence of donor polymer on the molecular ordering
of small molecular acceptors in nonfullerene polymer solar cells.
Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1701674 (2018).
51.
Wu, D. et al. Blade coaring aligned, high-performance,
semiconducting-polymer transistors. Chem. Mater. 30,
1924–1936 (2018).
Acknowledgements
C.B.N. and M.-H.Y. acknowledge support from the Medical Research
Council and the Korea Health Industry Development Institute (UK-Kor-
ean Partnering Award MC_PC_18066). C.B.N. acknowledges the Eur-
opean Commission for ﬁnancial support through the MITICS H2020-EU-
FET Open project (No. 964677). M.-H.Y. acknowledges a National
Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government
(MSIT) (NRF-2018M3A7B4070988, NRF-2021R1A2C1013015, NRF-
2020M3D1A1030660, NRF-2020M1A2A2080748, and NRF-
2017K1A1A2013153).
Author contributions
J.H.K. and R.H. conceived and designed the experiments. J.H.K., I.L., and
S.P. prepared the devices. Data acquisition/analysis was performed by
R.H. and P.A.G.F. (NMR, GPC, UV-vis, cyclic voltammetry, spectro-
electrochemistry, and computational simulation); J.H.K. and I.-Y.J.,
(moving front experiment, OECT device characterization); and H.A.
(GIWAXD); C.B.N. and M.-H.Y. coordinated the project. The manuscript
was written by J.H.K. and R.H. with input from all the authors and revised
by C.B.N. and M.-H.Y. All authorscontributed to the manuscript and have
given approval to the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Christian B. Nielsen or Myung-Han Yoon.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous, reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42840-z
Nature Communications|        (2023) 14:7577 
12

