The Key Role of Side Chain Linkage in Structure Formation and
Mixed Conduction of Ethylene Glycol Substituted Polythiophenes
Philip Schmode, Achilleas Savva, Robert Kahl, David Ohayon, Florian Meichsner, Oleksandr Dolynchuk,
Thomas Thurn-Albrecht, Sahika Inal,* and Mukundan Thelakkat*
Cite This: ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Functionalizing conjugated polymers with polar
ethylene glycol side chains enables enhanced swelling and
facilitates ion transport in addition to electronic transport in
such systems. Here, we investigate three polythiophene homopol-
ymers (P3MEET, P3MEEMT, and P3MEEET) having diﬀerently
linked (without spacer and with methyl and ethyl spacer,
respectively) diethylene glycol side chains. All the polymers were
tested in organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs). They show
drastic diﬀerences in the device performance. The highest μOECT
C* product of 11.5 F/cm·V·s was obtained for ethyl-spaced
P3MEEET. How the injection and transport of ions is inﬂuenced
by the side-chain linkage was studied with electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy, which shows a dramatic increase in volumetric capacitance from 80 ± 9 up to 242 ± 17 F/cm3 on
going from P3MEET to P3MEEET. Thus, ethyl-spaced P3MEEET exhibits one of the highest reported volumetric capacitance
values among p-type polymers. Moreover, P3MEEET exhibits in dry thin ﬁlms an organic ﬁeld-eﬀect transistor (OFET) hole
mobility of 0.005 cm2/V·s, highest among the three, which is one order of magnitude higher than that for P3MEEMT. The extracted
hole mobility from OECT (oxidized swollen state) and the hole mobility in solid-state thin ﬁlms (OFET) show contradictory trends
for P3MEEMT and P3MEEET. In order to understand exactly the properties in the hydrated and dry states, the crystal structure of
the polymers was investigated with wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) and grazing incidence WAXS, and the water uptake under
applied potential was monitored using electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (E-QCMD). These
measurements reveal an amorphous state for P3MEET and a semicrystalline state for P3MEEMT and P3MEEEET. On the other
hand, E-QCMD conﬁrms that P3MEEET swells 10 times more than P3MEEMT in the oxidized state. Thus, the importance of the
ethyl spacer toward crystallinity and mixed-conduction properties was clearly demonstrated, emphasizing the impact of side chain
linkage of diethylene glycol. This detailed study oﬀers a better understanding of how to design high-performance organic mixed
conductors.
KEYWORDS: bioelectronics, organic electrochemical transistors, polythiophenes, mixed conductors, side-chain engineering
1. INTRODUCTION
Side-chain engineering of conjugated polymers (semiconduc-
tors) is one of the most powerful strategies to modify the
properties such as crystallinity, charge transport, and solubility
of conjugated polymers.1 Especially, polar side chains are of
great interest in conjugated polymers because they create a
permanent dipole, decrease the dielectric constant, reduce the
π−π stacking distance, enable enhanced swelling, facilitating
simultaneous ionic and electronic transport (mixed con-
duction).2−4 In speciﬁc examples, it was also demonstrated
that this modiﬁcation improves the doping eﬃciency due to
the higher miscibility of dopant molecules within the
hydrophilic side chains.5 In 2014, we demonstrated that
conjugated polyelectrolytes (with ionic side chains) based on
polythiophenes obtained using controlled polymerization are
suitable candidates for mixed conduction.6,7 However, due to
their high solubility in water, device operation could only be
realized after cross-linking the material. A strategy to reduce
the amount of cross-linkers (which dilute the active semi-
conductor) is provided by copolymers of conjugated
polyelectrolytes and hydrophobic conjugated polymers.8
Mixed conductors based on ethylene glycol (EG) substituted
conjugated polymers are viable alternatives to conjugated
polyelectrolytes. Their non-ionic hydrophilic EG side chains
have been reported to facilitate ion transport and storage
Received:
November 28, 2019
Accepted:
February 18, 2020
Published: February 18, 2020
Research Article
www.acsami.org
© 2020 American Chemical Society
13029
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
Downloaded via UNIV ILLINOIS URBANA-CHAMPAIGN on February 7, 2022 at 06:14:09 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

during biasing in aqueous electrolytes.2,9 Thus, these polar
conjugated polymers carrying EG side chains are potential
candidates for biomedical and bioengineering applications and
do not require any additional cross-linkers in aqueous media.10
In general, the mixed conductors are attractive materials for
several applications, such as thermoelectric devices, electro-
chromic displays, and bioelectronics.8,9,11,12
The widely studied class of p-type semiconductors for
bioelectronics still comprises polythiophene derivatives due to
their high crystallinity, excellent charge carrier properties, high
solubility, and the feasibility of a controlled synthesis. The
synthesis of substituted polythiophenes is of exceptional
character due to the quasi-living polymerization character of
the Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization, which was
initially developed for poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT).13−15
For bioelectronic applications, materials must show an
excellent balance between a high ion transport and a high
electronic charge transport, both of which are strongly
correlated to the morphology of the polymers.16,17 Both
these properties are often contradictory because ion con-
duction requires hydration, swelling, and free volume of the
polymer in an aqueous medium, whereas high hole transport is
generally observed in highly crystalline nonpolar conjugated
polymers.18 For bioelectronic applications, organic electro-
chemical transistors (OECTs) provide a promising device
conﬁguration. In OECTs, small changes in ion ﬂuxes in an
electrolyte result in large changes in electrical output current,
that is, the channel current.19 Here, the semiconductor
material is in the channel, which is in direct contact with the
(typically aqueous) medium. During the operation of a p-type
accumulation mode OECT, a small voltage applied at the gate
electrode, VG (<1 V), injects anions into the channel
compensating for the holes injected from the contacts,
resulting in increased conductivity of the semiconductor.19
Because of the change in the channel conductivity, the current
between source and drain IG increases.18 The steady-state
performance of OECTs can be expressed by their trans-
conductance, gm. The product μOECT C* of OECT mobility
(μOECT) and volumetric capacitance (C*) was reported as a
ﬁgure of merit value to benchmark the mixed conduction
properties of materials and predict their performance in
OECTs.16 This product can be extracted from eq 1 using the
measured transconductance gm, the threshold voltage Vth, the
applied gate bias VG, and the geometry-dependent OECT
parameters such as the channel width (W) and channel length
(L) as well as the channel thickness d.
μ
= ∂
∂
=
· ·
· *·
−
g
I
V
W d
L
C
V
V
(
)
m
D
G
OECT
th
G
(1)
The most studied polymer in OECTs is still poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)
due to its commercial availability, good mixed conductivity in
the doped state, and high μOECT (1.9 cm2/V·s) and moderate
C* values (39 F/cm3).16 PEDOT:PSS is available only in the
doped state, and therefore the OECTs are operated in
depletion mode. On the other hand, undoped p-type
conjugated copolymers equipped with EG side chains and
thienothiophene moieties working under accumulation mode
have already reached μC* product values of around 300 F/cm·
V·s. The best performing polymer of this class is poly(2-(3,3′-
bis(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)-[2,2′-bithiophen]-
5-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene), p(g2T-TT).20−22 In these ma-
terials, the ability of water molecules to form hydrogen bonds
with EG allows swelling and facile ion penetration, necessary
for electrochemical (i.e., bulk) doping. Also, the fact that EG
substituted polythiophenes are less soluble in water neces-
sitates the use of external cross-linkers (also used in
PEDOT:PSS) superﬂuous, which is advantageous for biolec-
tronics.23 Another example of polythiophenes functionalized
with EG side chains was reported by Flagg et al.24 They
studied the inﬂuence of the size of the doping anion in OECTs
using
poly(3-{[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]methyl}-
thiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3MEEMT). They found that compared
to P3HT, P3MEEMT has faster anion injection rates, which
was attributed to the hydration of the P3MEEMT crystal
lattice. However, the impact of the nature of the linkage of the
ethylene glycol side chain on mixed conduction and OECT
performance was not systematically studied up to now. The
ﬁrst report regarding the importance of the EG linkage came
from another ﬁeld, viz., Li+ conduction for battery
applications.25 They investigated polythiophene derivatives
with diethylene glycol side chains, where the ﬁrst oxygen of the
glycol side chain is directly connected to the thiophene core
(P3MEET) or via a methyl spacer (P3MEEMT). They showed
that the Li+-ion conductivity (using added LiTFSI salt)
increases in P3MEET.25 However, these polymers are neither
studied for their mixed conduction properties nor compared in
OECTs or organic ﬁeld-eﬀect transistors (OFETs).
Motivated by this observation of the large diﬀerence in Li+-
ion conduction, we wanted to investigate the inﬂuence of the
nature of diethylene glycol linkage on mixed conduction,
crystallinity, and performance in OFET and OECT devices by
systematical comparative studies. For this purpose, three
ethylene glycol functionalized polythiophene derivatives were
synthesized by controlled polymerization using KCTP. The
diethylene glycol side chains were linked with either no spacer
(P3MEET), a methyl spacer (P3MEEMT), or an ethyl spacer
(P3MEEET). For a detailed comparative study of polymers
prepared under same conditions, we synthesized the known
polymers (P3MEET and P3MEEMT) and extended the series
to a new polymer having ethyl spacer, P3MEEET. We
elucidate the impact of EG side-chain linkage on the interplay
of structure formation, swelling, volumetric capacitance, and
charge carrier mobility resulting in eﬃcient mixed conduction
properties. The three polymers diﬀer in all the above
properties drastically. For understanding these drastic diﬀer-
ences in properties among the three polymers, we carried out
ﬁrst solid-state studies in thin ﬁlms and bulk samples using
OFETs, X-ray diﬀraction (XRD), and atomic force microscopy
(AFM). These studies reveal that the crystallinity of
P3MEEET reaches the highest value of 58% in this series.
Also, only P3MEEET showed a lamellar morphology in thin
ﬁlms. In line with these properties, P3MEEET with an ethyl
spacer-linked EG side chain shows the best performance in
OECTs. From OECT measurements, the highest ﬁgure of
merit value (μC* product) of 11.5 F/cm·V·s and highest
volumetric capacitance of 242 ± 17 F/cm3 were determined
for this ethyl spacer polymer P3MEEET. To enable an
explanation of the extraordinary OECT performance of
P3MEEET, the ionic charge storage capability was quantiﬁed
using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. This study
reveals a linear increase in the volumetric capacitance C* upon
increasing the spacer length. Electrochemical quartz crystal
microbalance with dissipation monitoring (E-QCMD) meas-
urements were carried out to evaluate the diﬀerences in water/
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13030

ion uptake of the polymer ﬁlms upon applying a doping
potential in aqueous electrolytes. Out of these comprehensive
and systematic studies, both in thin dry ﬁlms and hydrated
doped state of this series of three diethylene glycol function-
alized polythiophenes, we could elucidate the unique proper-
ties associated with an ethyl spacer linkage of diethylene glycol
in substituted polythiophenes.
2. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
2.1. Materials. All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich
or Fischer Scientiﬁc and used as received. P3HT was purchased from
BASF SE (Mn = 15.6 kg/mol, Đ = 1.6, measured with size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) with tetrahydrofuran (THF) as an eluent and
a polystyrene calibration). The detailed monomer and polymer
synthesis are described in the Supporting Information.
2.2. Methods. 2.2.1.
1H NMR. Spectra were recorded in
deuterated chloroform on a Bruker Avance 250 spectrometer at 300
MHz at room temperature. Chemical shifts are noted in ppm and
coupling constants in Hz. All spectra were calibrated according to the
residual solvent peaks (CHCl3 δ = 7.26 ppm).
2.2.2. Size Exclusion Chromatography. SEC was performed
utilizing a Waters 515 HPLC pump and THF with 0.25 wt %
tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB) as an eluent at a ﬂow rate of
0.5 mL/min. A volume of 100 μL of polymer solution (1−2 mg/mL)
was injected with a 2707 Waters auto-sampler into a column setup
comprising a guard column (Agilent PLgel Guard MIXED-C, 5 ×
0.75 cm, particle size of 5 μm) and two separation columns (Agilent
PLgel MIXED-C, 30 × 0.75 cm, particle size of 5 μm). Polymer size
distributions were monitored with a Waters 998 photodiode array
detector at 254 nm and a Waters 414 refractive index detector.
Narrow distributed polystyrene standards were used for calibration
and 1,2-dichlorobenzene as an internal reference.
2.2.3. Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). A Perkin Elmer
DSC 7 was used with a heating/cooling rate of 10 K/min. All samples
1st cooling and 2nd heating shown except for P3MEEMT: multiple
measurements were conducted: max temperature increased gradually
increased in steps of 10 °C from 80 to 130 °C, two measurement runs
each, measurement shown is 2nd measurement to 110 °C.
2.2.4. Wide-Angle X-ray Scattering (WAXS). A SAXSLAB
laboratory setup (Retro-F) (Copenhagen, Denmark) was used. As
an X-ray source, an AXO microfocus was used, with an AXO
multilayer monochromator (Cu Kα radiation λ= 0.15418 nm, ASTIX)
purchased from X-ray optics. For 2D scattering patterns, a Dectris
PILATUS R 300 K detector (Daettwil, Switzerland) was used.
SAXSGUI v2.19.02 was used for data reduction of the WAXS and
SAXS patterns. All measurements were conducted under vacuo and
WAXS in transmission, grazing incidence WAXS (GIWAXS) in
reﬂection. The sample-to-detector distance is around 89 mm. All
samples measured in the ordered temperature region and in the melt:
P3HT and P3MEEET during cooling run, and P3MEEMT and
P3MEET during heating run.
2.2.5. Spectroelectrochemistry Measurements. Thin ﬁlms were
prepared on ITO-coated glass substrates. Measurements were carried
out using a UV−Vis spectrometer (OceanOptics USB 2000+)
integrated with an Ivium CompactStat potentiostat. A Pt mesh was
used as the counter electrode and a Ag/AgCl electrode as the
reference electrode. The indicated voltages were applied versus VOC
for 10 s until the current stabilized prior to recording of the spectrum.
2.2.6. Electrochemical Impedance Measurements (EIS). Electro-
chemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) for determination of
capacitance was measured on polymer coated electrodes with a
Metrohm Autolab PGSTAT128N at a frequency range between 100
kHz and 0.1 Hz. The impedance spectra of the gate of the OECT
(0.003364 cm2 area) were measured in 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution
using a standard Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and a Pt mesh as
the counter electrode. The measurements were performed at a DC
oﬀset potential that enables the maximum achievable doping for the
material and an AC amplitude of 10 mV. Once the spectra were
recorded, they were ﬁt to equivalent circuit using native tool software
Metrohm Autolab NOVA. For ﬁtting, Randles circuit was used,
Relectrolyte(Rpolymer||Cpolymer), and resulted in good ﬁt quality. The
capacitance values that are extracted were normalized by the
measured ﬁlm volume to determine volumetric capacitance (C*).
Thickness of ﬁlms was measured in the dry state with a Bruker Dektac
proﬁlometer. See Supporting Information, Figure S10 for an example
of experimental determination of volumetric capacitance.
2.2.7. Organic Field-Eﬀect Transistors (OFETs). Bottom gate/
bottom contact organic ﬁeld-eﬀect transistors (OFET Gen4) were
purchased from Fraunhofer IPMS. N-doped silicon (doping at the
surface, n ≈3 × 1017 cm−3) was used as the surface and gate
electrode. The dielectric consists of a 230 nm layer of silicon oxide.
Each substrate consisted of 16 devices with a constant channel width
of 10 mm and varying channel length of 10−20 μm. The source and
drain electrodes were a 30 nm-thick gold layer on a 10 nm ITO
adhesion layer. The devices were prepared by cleaning in acetone and
subsequently in isopropanol in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min followed
by 15 min treatment in an ozone oven at 50 °C and subsequent
silanization by 45 min treatment in a bath of 1 wt %
octadecyltrichlorosilane (ODTS) in toluene at 60 °C. The devices
were rinsed with toluene and i-propanol and dried. Thin polymer
ﬁlms were spin-cast from 5 mg/mL chloroform solutions at a spinning
speed of 3000 rpm under ambient conditions. All devices were stored
and measured under a nitrogen atmosphere. The I−V characteristics
were measured using an Agilent B1500 semiconductor parameter
analyzer. Using eq 2 the charge carrier mobilities were calculated from
the slope of the (Id)0.5−Vg plots.
μ
=
−
I
W
L C
V
V
2
(
)
D
i
G
th
2
(2)
2.2.8. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). Measurements were
performed on a Bruker MultiMode 8 AFM with a Nanoscope V
controller equipped with a ScanAsystFluid+ cantilever (f 0 = 150 kHz,
k = 0.7 N m−1) from Bruker. An excitation frequency of 2 kHz was
used. Height and adhesion images (reﬂect strength of adhesive forces
between the tip and surface) were recorded. Editing was done with
open source software Gwyddion.
2.2.9. OECT Fabrication. The devices were fabricated according to
the parylene-C lift-oﬀmethod reported previously.26 Standard glass
microscope slides were cleaned via sonication in 2% soap solution,
acetone, and isopropyl alcohol and dried under N2. Connection pads
and interconnects were deposited through a lift-oﬀprocess using
photolithographic patterning of two positive photoresists (LOR 5B
and S1813). A subsequent metal deposition via sputtering of Cr (10
nm) and Au (110 nm) and metal lift-oﬀusing NMP deﬁne the Au
lines. A ﬁrst layer of parylene C (1.6 μm), deposited together with a
small amount of 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (A-174
Silane) to enhance adhesion, acts as an insulator to prevent disturbing
capacitive eﬀects at the metal−liquid interface. Subsequently, an
antiadhesive layer was spin-coated using a dilution of industrial
cleaner (2 wt %, Micro-90), and a second parylene-C sacriﬁcial layer
(2.1 μm) is deposited. To deﬁne the contact pads and the channel of
the OECT, a second photolithographic patterning step using a thick
positive photoresist (AZ9260) and AZ developer is used to protect
the parylene-C layers from a subsequent plasma reactive ion etching
step. All the polymer solutions were prepared in chloroform at 10 mg/
mL and spin-coated from a glass ﬁber ﬁlter with 0.45 μm pore
diameter. Peeling of the second parylene-C sacriﬁcial layer deﬁnes the
channel dimensions. The thickness of the channels was measured
using a DEKTAK 150 stylus proﬁlometer.
2.2.10. OECT Characterization. OECTs were characterized using a
dual-channel source-meter unit (NI-PXI) with custom-written control
code in LabVIEW. All measurements were performed using a Ag/
AgCl pellet (D = 2 mm × H = 2 mm; Warner Instruments) as the
gate electrode. The aqueous electrolytes were contained in a PDMS
well on top of the OECTs, and the electrolyte volume was constant at
120 μL for all measurements.
2.2.11. E-QCM-D Swelling Experiments. We performed electro-
chemical quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring
(EQCM-D) measurements using a Q-sense analyzer (QE401, Biolin
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13031

Scientiﬁc). Swelling measurements were performed as follows. First,
we recorded the QCM-D response of the bare Au sensors in the air
followed by the injection of the NaCl(aq.) 0.1 M solutions into the
chamber. This resulted in large shifts in frequency (f) and dissipation
of energy (D) due to the density diﬀerences between the two media.
The measurements were then stopped, the sensors were removed, and
polymer ﬁlms were spin-cast directly on the same sensor from a 10
mg/mL chloroform solution at 1000 rpm. The absolute f value for
each polymer-coated sensor was obtained in both air and NaCl(aq.) 0.1
M after the f signal was perfectly ﬂat (i.e., f < 0.5 Hz), assuring that
the system is in equilibrium. We then compared the absolute
diﬀerence in f for multiple overtones between the bare sensor and the
polymer-coated sensors in both air and NaCl(aq.) 0.1 M by using the
function “stitched data” of Q-soft software. This function compares
the selected datasets based on the raw frequencies measured and
excludes the eﬀect of the diﬀerent densities between the two media
(Figure S11). Thus, the diﬀerence in the f values of the stitched data
is directly analogous to the thickness of the polymer in both media,
which is calculated by using the Sauerbrey equation below (eq 3).
EQCM-D measurements were performed using the Autolab
PGstat128N potentiostat coupled with Q-sense electrochemistry
module. The three-electrode setup was composed of Ag/AgCl
(reference electrode), Pt (counter electrode), and Au/polymer
EQCM-D sensor (working electrode). The physical modeling of the
two measured parameters, the f and D, is related to the viscoelastic
properties of the ﬁlm. On the one hand, a rigid ﬁlm shows zero D as
there are theoretically no energy losses (no viscoelasticity), and the
Sauerbrey equation can be used to quantify the mass (m) using only
one overtone as described in eq 3:
Δ
= −
Δ
m
n f
( 17.7)/
n
(3)
On the other hand, a thicker and/or softer ﬁlm does not follow the
motion of the crystal and leads to energy losses during the oscillation.
We approximate thicker and/or soft ﬁlms to behave like a Kelvin−
Voigt element, which means that they exhibit both viscous and elastic
characteristics acting in parallel (viscoelastic). A Kelvin−Voigt
element has a complex shear modulus as described in eq 4:
μ
π η
* =
+
G
2 if
(4)
where G* is the complex shear modulus, μ is the elasticity (kg m−1
s−2), η is the viscosity (kg m−1 s−1), and f is the frequency. To
calculate the mass changes of a thick, viscoelastic ﬁlm, complex shear
modulus was analyzed and ﬁtted using at least three frequency and
dissipation of energy overtones. Q-Tools and D-ﬁnd software was
used for the modeling and data analysis. Since the polymer ﬁlms are
becoming soft and uptake a signiﬁcant amount of water under doping
potentials, we used the Kelvin−Voigt viscoelastic (VSE) model to ﬁt
the data. To quantify the mass correctly, we used the f and D data of
three diﬀerent overtones (3rd, 5th, and 7th). The good quality of the
ﬁts guaranteed the accurate mass calculation accumulated within the
ﬁlms upon applied potentials.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Three diethylene glycol functionalized thiophene monomers
were synthesized, diﬀering in the linkage of diethylene glycol
side chain respective to the thiophene core in order to obtain
the three polymers: P3MEET, P3MEEMT, and P3MEEET
(Figure 1b). The detailed monomers and polymer synthesis
can be found in the Supporting Information (Scheme S1). For
the polymer synthesis, we used the well-established Kumada
catalyst
transfer
polymerization,
with
[1,3-bis-
(diphenylphosphino)propane]dichloronickel(II) (Ni(dppp)-
Cl2) as a catalyst and tert-butyl magnesium chloride as a
Grignard metathesis reagent. All the polymerization reactions
proceeded for 4 h, which is noticeably longer than that for the
3-hexylthiophene monomer.13 We assume that the catalyst
Ni(dppp)Cl2 probably coordinates to the ethylene glycol side
chain (not only to the thiophene backbone) and so prolongs
the polymerization.
The polymers have a narrow dispersity (Đ = 1.08 to 1.4) and
appreciably high molecular weight (∼12 kg/mol) required for
charge carrier transport, as determined with SEC measure-
ments in THF. In the case of P3MEET, under our
polymerization conditions in THF, we reached a maximum
molecular weight of 10 kg/mol due to its limited solubility in
THF and the relatively high reactivity of the monomer. The
ﬁnal polymers were puriﬁed using precipitation and Soxhlet
extraction methods. P3MEEMT and P3MEEET are highly
Figure 1. (a) Newly developed synthetic route for the thiophene monomer 3MEEET (3) with an ethyl spacer. (b) Kumada catalyst transfer
polymerization procedure to obtain the polymers P3MEET (black), P3MEEMT (red), and P3MEEET (blue).
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13032

soluble in common solvents for polythiophenes, such as
tetrahydrofuran and chloroform.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) studies reveal that the
thermal stability of the polymers increases in the series from
without spacer to the ethyl spacer linkage of the EG unit. The
lower thermal stability of P3MEET can be attributed mainly to
the electron-withdrawing eﬀect of a directly connected EG unit
(Figure S1). In diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
experiments (Figure S2), a melting point for P3MEEET at
122 °C and a weak melting point for P3MEEMT at 99 °C can
be observed, whereas P3MEET is an amorphous material. Both
melting points as well as the melting enthalpies are noticeably
lower compared to those of the benchmark polythiophene
P3HT. These results indicate that EG side chains lead to a
reduced molecular order. The hole mobility in the dry state
was extracted out of organic-ﬁeld eﬀect transistors (OFETs).
The hole mobility of the polymers was investigated in bottom-
gate (Si) and bottom-contact (Au) devices with a silicon oxide
layer as the dielectric containing two diﬀerent channels ranging
from 10 to 20 μm. The polymer ﬁlms were directly spin-coated
from chloroform onto the substrates. By plotting the square
root of the drain current ID versus the gate voltage VG, the hole
mobility can be estimated. The average value for the hole
mobility was taken out of four transistor measurements. The
output and transfer curves of the OFET measurements are
depicted in Figure S3. Here, we observe a clear diﬀerence in
the charge carrier mobility.
P3MEEET exhibits one order of magnitude higher hole
mobility (0.005 cm2/V·s) compared to P3MEEMT (0.0003
cm2/V·s). With P3MEET, no transistor behavior could be
observed. Compared to benchmark polythiophene P3HT,
P3MEEET shows only one order of magnitude lower hole
mobility and, at the same time, the highest reported value for a
polar polythiophene homopolymer in transistors.27
To relate and possibly understand the diﬀerences in the hole
mobility in the solid state of the diﬀerent polymers in terms of
microscopic structure, we performed X-ray scattering experi-
ments in the bulk and in thin ﬁlms. Figure 2a shows WAXS
pattern measured in transmission. All polymers except
P3MEET were measured in the ordered state (solid line)
and in the melt (dashed lines), whereby the exact temperature
program for the diﬀerent samples was adjusted according to
their phase behavior observed in DSC (Figure S2). Generally,
with decreasing length of the alkyl spacer between the ﬁrst
oxygen in the side chain and the polythiophene backbone, we
observe a clear trend of decreasing order. This trend can be
quantiﬁed in terms of the crystallinity, as estimated from the
diﬀerent intensities of the amorphous scattering contribution
in between the ﬁrst two Bragg reﬂections according to Balko et
al.28 For P3HT, the scattering pattern measured at 275 °C and
at 20 °C after cooling from the melt is shown. The crystallinity
amounts to 81% are comparable to values obtained in our
previous studies.28 For P3MEEET, the measurement in the
melt state was taken at 140 °C. While the crystal structure of
P3MEEET is obviously similar to P3HT, the crystallinity
shows a reduced value of 58%. For P3MEEMT, the scattering
pattern measured at 70 °C during a heating run is shown as the
sample does not recrystallize during cooling from the melt
(150 °C), probably due to sample degradation. At this
temperature, the polymer is most well-ordered. In addition to a
further reduced crystallinity of only 32%, the (020) Bragg
reﬂection is less pronounced. P3MEET ﬁnally shows only one
much broader peak at the expected position of the (100) peak,
which presumably corresponds to an amorphous structure.
The measurement shown was taken at 20 °C as prepared and
at 100 °C. According to the earlier studies of the P3HT crystal
structure, the lattice parameters of a monoclinic unit cell of
P3HT were calculated from the WAXS peaks in Figure 2a (see
Table 1).28,29 Note that, to determine the crystalline structure
of the polymers precisely, a well-oriented sample would be
needed. As the GIWAXS patterns (Figure 2b) of both
P3MEEMT and P3MEEET show only a few diﬀraction
peaks, the crystal structure could not be determined from
these measurements alone. However, the qualitative similarity
Figure 2. (a) WAXS patterns of P3HT, P3MEEET, P3MEEMT, and P3MEET. All samples were measured in the ordered state (solid lines) and in
the melt (dashed lines). (b) Reciprocal space maps from GIWAXS of thin ﬁlms of P3MEET, P3MEEMT, P3MEEET, and P3HT measured at an
incident angle αi = 0.20°. After spin coating, the polymer ﬁlms except P3MEET were melt-crystallized in vacuo (P3HT and P3MEEET) and
annealed (P3MEEMT at 70 °C).
Table 1. Crystal Lattice Parameters of P3HT, P3MEEMT,
and P3MEEET Calculated from the Corresponding WAXS
Patterns
aValues calculated from WAXS measurement taken at 20 °C to allow
for comparison between materials.
bValues assumed based on
similarity of scattering patterns to P3HT.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13033

between the WAXS of P3HT and P3MEEMT and P3MEEET
suggests a similarity in their crystal structure. As such, we
estimated the lattice parameters a and b for P3MEEMT and
P3MEEET under the assumption of a monoclinic crystal lattice
with the same angle γ as for P3HT (Table 1). While the b
parameter does not show any signiﬁcant change, the
monotonic increase in the parameter a when going from
P3HT to P3MEEET is expected as the side chains become
more voluminous.
Apart from molecular order or crystallinity, molecular
orientation can also have a strong inﬂuence on transport
properties. We therefore performed grazing incidence WAXS
X-ray diﬀraction (incident angle of αi = 0.20°) experiments;
the results are shown in Figure 2b). Complementary
measurements taken at an incident angle αi = 10° in order
to access regions of higher q on the meridian gave consistent
results and are shown in the Supporting Information (Figure
S4). The polymer ﬁlms were spin coated onto Si substrates and
afterward melt-crystallized in vacuo during slow cooling to
room temperature. The ﬁlm thicknesses used were approx-
imately 20−30 nm. In all polymers, besides the amorphous
P3MEET, the (100) peak is clearly visible with orientation
perpendicular and parallel to the substrate, indicating a mixed
crystal orientation but to diﬀerent degrees. P3MEEET shows
the strongest edge-on component. Overall, unlike the eﬀects
on crystallinity, we did not observe any strongly pronounced
inﬂuence of the diethylene glycol linkage on the molecular
orientation of ethylene glycol substituted polythiophenes on a
Si substrate. Similar trends as in the scattering experiments
could be observed in AFM images taken from the thin ﬁlms
samples used for GIWAXS.
The AFM was operated in peak force tapping mode, and
Figure 3 shows height and adhesion images. Consistent with
the strong edge-on orientation of P3MEEET, a very clear
lamellar structure was observed for this sample. The
morphology of P3HT appears somewhat weaker as it is
often found for commercial samples but still well visible. For
the other two samples, P3MEEMT and P3MEET, no clear
structures can be discerned, consistent with the lower degree of
order observed for these samples in the WAXS and GIWAXS
data. Summarizing the results obtained from the structure
analysis, the diﬀerences in the measured hole mobility in the
investigated polymers can be explained neither by a change in
the π−π stacking distance nor by a change in the crystal
orientation, which are known to have a strong inﬂuence on the
charge carrier mobility.30 Although further factors of inﬂuence
cannot be ruled out, we suggest that the diﬀerences in the
observed hole mobility are mainly caused by the diﬀerences in
crystallinity.
Our next questions are whether the polymers undergo
oxidation at doping potentials applied in an aqueous medium
and how the nature of the diethylene glycol side chain linkage
aﬀects the oxidation behavior of these polymers. This was
investigated with spectroelectrochemistry (SEC) and cyclic
voltammetry experiments in the 0.1 M NaCl aqueous
electrolyte. Figure 4a shows the UV−Vis spectra of the ﬁlms
subject to doping potentials (0 to −0.9 V, in steps of −0.1 V,
the neutral state is at 0 V, close to the open-circuit potential,
VOC). In Figure S5, the relative changes in SEC spectra
obtained by subtracting the pristine spectrum at 0 V (i.e.,
before application of voltage) from the spectrum of each
oxidized state reached by varying doping potentials are shown.
For all the three polymers, the main π−π* associated
absorption intensity decreases, and concomitantly a red-shifted
polaron peak starts growing upon application of a doping
potential. The evolution of the decreasing π−π* absorption
maximum and the growing polaron peak is depicted in Figure
4b. The onset, as well as the oxidation of P3MEEMT and
P3MEEET in aqueous solution, is comparable, regarding the
extent of oxidation. The intensity of the polaron peak of
P3MEET is substantially higher than that of the polymers with
spacers when biased at the same doping voltages. Moreover,
the onset of the oxidation for P3MEET is very low at around
−0.2 V, whereas the polymers containing methyl and ethyl
spacers exhibit higher onsets of about −0.5 to −0.6 V. Both
observations can be explained as due to the ease of oxidation of
P3MEET, which in turn can be attributed to its low ionization
potential. This agrees very well with the photon electron
spectroscopy in air (PESA) results discussed later. Further-
more, we recorded cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the
polymer ﬁlms in 0.1 M NaCl solution (Figure 4c). As expected
from PESA and SEC studies, a drastic diﬀerence on the
Figure 3. AFM pictures of P3MEET, P3MEEMT, P3MEEET, and P3HT recorded using peak force tapping mode. The height images are displayed
in the upper row, and the adhesion images are displayed in the lower row.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13034

oxidation onset is observed; P3MEET shows an early onset at
0.1 V. P3MEEMT and P3MEEET, on the other hand, show
pronounced oxidation in contact with the electrolyte, with an
oxidation onset for P3MEEMT at around 0.5 V and that for
P3MEEET at around 0.4 V, which also corresponds to the
threshold voltage Vth observed in OECT operation as
discussed below.
Since all polymers exhibit an oxidation behavior in an
aqueous environment at low applied voltages (<0.7 V vs Ag/
AgCl), the next step is to test them in OECT devices in order
to quantify the mixed conduction properties. Figure 5a
illustrates the OECT geometry, which was used to examine
the mixed conduction properties of the three functionalized
polythiophenes. The fabrication of the devices is described in
the Experimental Section.31 Figure 5b depicts the transfer
curves of OECTs comprising these three polymers operated in
0.1 M NaCl solution (see the output curves and additional
transfer curves in Figures S7−S9).
We measured comparable thicknesses for the polymer ﬁlms,
between 90 and 100 nm, patterned on microscale Au patterns
adjacent to the channels. Amongst all OECTs, the maximum
drain current ID was observed for the ethyl spacer derivative
P3MEEET, whereas the maximum transconductance (at a gate
voltage VG = −0.8 V) was measured for P3MEEMT and
P3MEEET. The OECT characteristics are summarized in
Table 2. Notably, P3MEET in which the diethylene glycol side
chain is directly connected to the thiophene backbone exhibits
a very low threshold voltage Vth of −0.18 V compared to the
polymers with a methyl and an ethyl spacer. This can be
mainly attributed to the increased electron-withdrawing eﬀect
of the directly connected oxygen in P3MEET, making this
polymer easily oxidizable. To understand the diﬀerences in the
threshold voltages, the ionization energies (IP) were measured
using photon electron spectroscopy measurements in air
(PESA; Figure S9). These measurements reveal that the IP
value is the lowest for P3MEET (IP = −4.5 eV) compared to
the other two polymers with methyl or ethyl spacers, which
explains the observed low threshold voltage in OECT
operation for the former. This is also in agreement with the
SEC and CV results discussed above. In comparison with the
IP value of P3HT (−4.67 eV),32 P3MEEMT and P3MEEET
show similar values. This can be possibly explained by the
methyl and ethyl spacer in the latter, which makes them similar
to P3HT. The easiness of oxidation in P3MEET originates
from the direct oxygen connection without any spacer.
In order to determine the μOECT C* product, eq 1 was used.
By plotting the transconductance gm against the channel
geometry and operation parameters of the OECT, μOECT C*
can be estimated from the slope of the curve ﬁt to the linear
regime (Figure 5c). In 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution, the
μOECT C* products for P3MEEMT (9.8 F/cm·V·s) and
P3MEEET (11.5 F/cm·V·s) are similar and considerably
higher than that for P3MEET (0.04 F/cm·V·s). Thus,
P3MEEET with ethyl spacer is the most promising candidate
for bioelectronic applications. It is also to be noted that all
these polymers were tested in OECTs without the need of any
cross-linker. It is known that OECT characteristics depend also
on the nature of the electrolyte.20 An electrolyte containing
divalent anions or anions with diﬀerent polarities may result in
an increased capacitance and/or increased charge carrier
mobility of the semiconductor, which can be applied in the
case of P3MEEET to further improve the performance of the
OECTs made thereof.
To investigate the charge storage capability, measurements
of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Figure S10) of
the polymers were recorded for the ﬁlm before doping (V =
VOC) and at a doping potential that gives the maximum
transconductance (V = −0.8 V for P3MEEMT and P3MEEET
and −0.6 V for P3MEET vs Ag/AgCl). The impedance data
were ﬁt to Randles circuit Relectrolyte(Rpolymer||Cpolymer) to extract
the capacitance of the polymers, which was then normalized by
the volume of the ﬁlms to estimate the volumetric capacitance
C*. The volumetric capacitance increases from 80 ± 9 to 160
± 12 and 242 ± 17 F/cm3 when going from P3MEET without
a spacer to P3MEEMT and P3MEEET having a methyl or an
ethyl spacer. The volumetric capacitance of P3MEEET is in
the range of the highest reported value for the benchmark-type
mixed conductor polymer p(g2T-TT).16 The electrochemical
charging in undoped (p-type) conjugated polymers involves
simultaneous anion injection from the electrolyte and hole
injection from the metal electrodes. Thus, a capacitor is formed
Figure 4. (a) Spectroelectrochemistry measurements of polymer ﬁlms
on ITO of P3MEEET (blue), P3MEEMT (red), and P3MEET
(black). The UV−Vis spectra were measured in 0.1 M NaCl when the
ﬁlms were biased from 0 to −0.9 V in a three-electrode setup with a
Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a Pt counter electrode. (b) Changes
in the intensities of polaron peak (top) and π−π* absorption
maximum (bottom) obtained from the diﬀerence spectra (Figure S6).
(c) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements of the copolymer ﬁlms
were recorded with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a Pt counter
electrode. CV curves were acquired at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in
NaCl solution (0.1 M, aqueous).
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13035

between these two carriers, which is the origin of the
capacitance of the polymer ﬁlm. Proctor et al. described that
the volumetric capacitance C* can be directly associated with
the density of these anion/hole pairs in the polymer.33 We
attribute the increase in C* to better accessibility of the mobile
holes to the penetrating anions. Sivaraman et al. linked the
increased capacitance of P3HT with a higher crystallinity and
order.34 They attributed an increase in capacitance in higher
crystalline P3HT derivatives to a decreased resistance for ion
motion in the ﬁlm. Furthermore, they observed that the highly
disordered amorphous phase poses more restriction to the drift
of ions. Thus, an increased volumetric capacitance C* in
P3MEEET compared to P3MEEMT and P3MEET can be
explained by the higher crystalline order and their
regioregularity. Additionally, the high capacitance of
P3MEEET can be well understood if the swelling and water/
ion uptake of this polymer are considered as discussed later.
Based on the capacitance values and the μOECT C* product
extracted from OECT measurements, the hole mobility μOECT
of the three polythiophenes can be estimated. μOECT describes
the mobility in the swollen oxidized state under OECT
operation and therefore strongly depends on the structural
order of the polymer in the swollen and oxidized state as well
as the used electrolyte. A high hole mobility in polythiophenes
is generally observed in well-ordered systems; thus, a large
swelling in OECT operation can lower the eﬀective hole
mobility of the system if the morphology or crystallinity in the
electrolyte medium is unfavorable for charge hopping.21
From OECT measurements, similar hole mobilities were
obtained for P3MEEMT and P3MEEET (0.06 and 0.05 cm2/
V·s), whereas P3MEET exhibits a lower mobility in the
swollen state (5.2 × 10−4 cm2/V·s). Comparing the μOECT
values (measured in hydrated state) to the μOFET values
obtained in thin dry ﬁlms allows us to draw conclusions
regarding the change in structure or morphology due to
swelling (Figure 5d). It is very interesting to note that
P3MEET is clearly an OECT material, although it did not
show any transistor characteristics in OFET conﬁguration,
Figure 5. (a) Illustration of an organic electrochemical transistor. The channel dimensions were W = 100 μm and L = 10 μm. OECTs were
operated in 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution with a Ag/AgCl pellet used as the gate electrode. (b) Transfer curve of P3MEET, P3MEEMT, and
P3MEEET. VD = −0.6 V for P3MEET and VD = −0.8 V for the other two polymers. (c) Extracting the μC* product from the plot of
transconductance gm versus the channel geometry and operation parameters. Dashed lines indicate the ﬁts. (d) OECT hole mobility extracted in
the hydrated state plotted against the bulk hole mobility estimated from organic ﬁeld-eﬀect transistors (OFETs; bottom-gate and bottom-contact
geometry).
Table 2. Summary of the Polymer Properties: Molecular Weight, Polydispersity, Thermal Properties and the Mixed
Conduction Properties Volumetric Capacitance C*, the Normalized Transconductance gm, and the Material-Dependent μOECT
C* Product
aSEC, with THF as the eluent and against polystyrene standards. bDSC in a nitrogen atmosphere and a heating rate of 10 K/min. cElectrical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) on Au electrodes with a DC voltage of 0.6 V (for P3MEET) or 0.8 V vs Ag/AgCl (for P3MEEMT and P3MEEET).
dVth was determined from Figure S7 by extrapolating the linear region of the curve. eIonization potentials were estimated with PESA experiments
(Figure S9). fgm at VG = −0.6 V and VD = −0.8 V and normalized by the ﬁlm thickness. gThe μOECT C* product was extracted from Figure 5c.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13036

indicating that swelling might have a positive inﬂuence on the
charge transport for this polymer. On the other hand,
P3MEEET (with the highest crystallinity in solid state),
which showed one order of magnitude higher OFET mobility
compared to P3MEEMT, forfeit this advantage in the swollen
state in OECT devices. These results can be understood only if
the swelling behavior of the three polymers is studied under
applied voltages. In order to understand the inﬂuence of EG
linkage on swelling and water/ion uptake properties of these
conjugated polymers, we used electrochemical quartz crystal
microbalance with dissipation monitoring (EQCM-D).35−37
EQCM-D allows monitoring of mass exchange between an
electrically active ﬁlm and an electrolyte as the ﬁlm undergoes
electrochemical doping/de-doping. Here we study, simulta-
neously, the mass (ions and water) taken up by the polymer
ﬁlms and the amount of charge generated during the
electrochemical doping. First, we measure the passive swelling
of the three polymers cast on QCM-D sensors as they are
exposed to 0.1 M NaCl solution. The passive swelling
percentage was calculated using the Sauerbrey model (eq
3).23,35 The pristine ﬁlms swell 5% ± 2% (P3MEET), 26% ±
8% (P3MEEMT), and 6% ± 3% (P3MEEET) of their initial
mass when exposed to the electrolyte (Figure S11). Here, we
observe that the degree of passive swelling follows the order:
P3MEEMT (methyl spacer) > P3MEEET (ethyl spacer) >
P3MEET. The trend in passive swelling could not be
correlated with the swelling in the doped state, and hence
we avoided speculations to explain this trend. We assume that
it may be linked to the morphology of the polymers in thin
ﬁlms prior to swelling. However, in the AFM images shown in
our manuscript, we do not observe any structural features for
P3MEEMT, whereas in P3MEEET, it shows a strong lamellar
order, which could inhibit water absorption.
This order completely changes when measuring the amount
of mass uptake triggered by a doping potential. The voltage
pulses used for each polymer ﬁlm are also the voltages that
enabled the maximum transconductance. Upon application of
a doping potential to the ﬁlms (with a magnitude that
corresponds to the maximum transconductance in OECTs),
we monitor tremendous diﬀerences in the water and ion
uptake (Figure 6b,d). Due to the large changes in the
dissipation, we used a Kelvin−Voigt viscoelastic model to
interpret the swelling behavior and to calculate the mass
uptake.38 P3MEEET takes up noticeably more mass compared
to P3MEEMT and P3MEET. The total mass (water and Cl−
ions) accumulating inside P3MEEET during oxidation is about
12 μg/cm2, whereas P3MEET and P3MEEMT take up around
1.0 μg/cm2 (see Figure S12 for the recorded raw frequency
and dissipation changes). This 12 times higher mass uptake of
P3MEEET during the penetration of electrolyte anions is by
far the highest value reported up to date compared to other
mixed conductors as well as the benchmark accumulation
mode material p(g2T-TT) when it is doped to approximately
to the same oxidized state.20,21 Furthermore, the charge
recorded from these ﬁlms in situ upon electrochemical doping
with Cl−ions is calculated to be 2.33 × 10−3 C for the
P3MEEET ﬁlm and 2.1 × 10−3 C for the P3MEEMT ﬁlm,
while it is 4.4 × 10−4 C for P3MEET, which were then
normalized by the ﬁlm thickness, resulting in 45.4 C/cm for
P3MEET, 135.5 C/cm for P3MEEMT, and 153.3 C/cm for
P3MEEET. These values are well in line with the volumetric
capacitance calculated from the electrochemical impedance
spectra of ﬁlms recorded in OECT channels (Figure S10) and
demonstrate the improvement in the ionic charging of the
ethylene glycol functionalized polythiophenes as a result of
side-chain engineering. Why exactly an ethyl spacer-linked
diethylene glycol (in P3MEEET) causes this strong ability of
water and ion uptake in the oxidized state compared to no
spacer or methyl spacer is not yet fully understood.
Additionally, it seems that the μOECT values also correlate
with the charging in the hydrated system. The observed
swelling in E-QCMD measurements for P3MEET (with no
measurable μOFET mobility) resulting in measurable μOECT also
supports this assumption. However, we like to point out that
mixed conduction in diﬀerently swollen and diﬀerently
oxidized systems is very complex and diﬃcult to be correlated
with the individual material properties in the solid state, for
example, the charge carrier mobilities in thin dry ﬁlms.
4. CONCLUSIONS
A detailed study of the impact and importance of the nature of
linkage of diethylene glycol side chain functionalized
Figure 6. (a) Doping potential proﬁle applied to the polymer ﬁlms,
0.8 V for P3MEEMT and P3MEEET and 0.6 V for P3MEET vs Ag/
AgCl. (b) Mass change and (c) the corresponding charge recorded as
the polymers were doped. All measurements were performed in 0.1 M
NaCl with a Ag/AgCl reference and Pt counter electrode, and the
polymer ﬁlm was deposited on the QCM-D crystal with an area of
0.7854 cm2. (d) Swelling percentage of polymer ﬁlms as they were
exposed to the electrolyte and upon the application of the doping
potential.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13037

polythiophene derivatives toward the mixed conduction and
solid-state properties was presented. Three deﬁned poly-
thiophenes equipped with diethylene glycol side chains
(P3MEET, P3MEEMT, and P3MEEET), varying the side-
chain linkage respective to the thiophene backbone (without
spacer and with methyl and ethyl spacer, respectively), were
synthesized in a controlled manner with similar molecular
weights and low polydispersity. The suitability of these
polymers for OECT applications was tested using SEC, UV−
Vis, and CV measurements performed in an aqueous medium.
We found that the low oxidation onset observed for P3MEET
correlates with the low ionization energy measured with PESA.
The solid-state hole mobility of the polymers was determined
using the OFET conﬁguration. Here, P3MEEET exhibits the
highest reported value (0.005 cm2/V·s) for a polar
polythiophene homopolymer, and this is one order of
magnitude higher compared to the polymer with a methyl
spacer (P3MEEMT). This increase in the solid-state hole
mobility can be attributed to the higher crystallinity of
P3MEEET compared to P3MEEMT as revealed by WAXS.
The diﬀerences in molecular order were also conﬁrmed by
AFM, where only P3MEEET shows a lamellar morphology. A
possible application in bioelectronic devices was tested with
organic electrochemical transistors in 0.1 M NaCl. Drastic
diﬀerences in the performance of the three conjugated
polymers could be observed, where P3MEEET (ethyl spacer)
shows the best mixed conduction properties with a μOECT C*
product of 11.5 (F/cm·V·s). To understand the inﬂuence of
linkage of diethylene glycol side chain and the extraordinary
performance of P3MEEET, the ionic charge storage capability
was tested using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. This
study reveals a linear increase in the volumetric capacitance C*
upon increasing the spacer length. This can be presumably
attributed to a better accessibility of the diethylene glycol side
chain and thus an enhanced ion transport as well as a higher
order of P3MEEET. P3MEEET exhibits a volumetric
capacitance of around 242 ± 17 F/cm3, which is in the
range of the highest reported values for p-type organic mixed
conductors.16 From OECT device characteristics, the hole
mobility (μOECT) of the polymers in the hydrated state was
extracted. The μOECT values of the P3MEEMT and P3MEEET
are almost identical in the swollen state. The diﬀerences in
water uptake and swelling were monitored with E-QCM-D
experiments, without (passive swelling) and under applied
doping potential. P3MEEET takes up 12 times more water and
ions than P3MEET and P3MEEMT in the oxidized state. The
charge uptake derived from the same measurements correlate
well with the volumetric capacitance. Thus, the nature of
linkage, which may seem to be trivial, plays an enormously
important role in deciding the complex interplay of swelling,
ion uptake, and charge transport in OECTs. We conclude that
this systematic and comparative study combining various
interdisciplinary characterization techniques gives insights into
determining factors inﬂuencing mixed conduction. Overall, this
contribution emphasizes the crucial role of side-chain
engineering in diethylene glycol substituted polythiophenes
toward high-performance polymeric mixed conductors.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsami.9b21604.
Detailed monomer and polymer synthesis, thermal
characterization (TGA and DSC), OFET transfer and
output curves, GIWAXS at an incident angle of α = 10°,
SEC diﬀerence spectra, additional OECT character-
ization, PESA measurements, impedance, and QCM-D
and EQCM-D raw frequency and dissipation changes at
diﬀerent overtones (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Sahika Inal −Biological and Environmental Science and
Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia;
orcid.org/0000-0002-1166-1512; Email: sahika.inal@
kaust.edu.sa
Mukundan Thelakkat −Applied Functional Polymers and
Bavarian Polymer Institute, University of Bayreuth, 95440
Bayreuth, Germany;
orcid.org/0000-0001-8675-1398;
Email: mukundan.thelakkat@uni-bayreuth.de
Authors
Philip Schmode −Applied Functional Polymers, University of
Bayreuth, 95440 Bayreuth, Germany
Achilleas Savva −Biological and Environmental Science and
Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
Robert Kahl −Experimental Polymer Physics Group, Martin
Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle, Germany
David Ohayon −Biological and Environmental Science and
Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
Florian Meichsner −Applied Functional Polymers, University of
Bayreuth, 95440 Bayreuth, Germany
Oleksandr Dolynchuk −Experimental Polymer Physics Group,
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle,
Germany;
orcid.org/0000-0002-5336-5068
Thomas Thurn-Albrecht −Experimental Polymer Physics
Group, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, 06120
Halle, Germany;
orcid.org/0000-0002-7618-0218
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the DFG (GRK 1640)
and Bavarian State Ministry for Education, Science and the
Arts (project: SolTech). Additional funding by the European
Union (EFRE) is gratefully acknowledged.
■REFERENCES
(1) Mei, J.; Bao, Z. Side Chain Engineering in Solution-Processable
Conjugated Polymers. Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 604−615.
(2) Giovannitti, A.; Maria, I. P.; Hanifi, D.; Donahue, M. J.; Bryant,
D.; Barth, K. J.; Makdah, B. E.; Savva, A.; Moia, D.; Zetek, M.; Barnes,
P. R. F.; Reid, O. G.; Inal, S.; Rumbles, G.; Malliaras, G. G.; Nelson,
J.; Rivnay, J.; McCulloch, I. The Role of the Side Chain on the
Performance of N-Type Conjugated Polymers in Aqueous Electro-
lytes. Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 2945−2953.
(3) Liu, J.; Qiu, L.; Alessandri, R.; Qiu, X.; Portale, G.; Dong, J.;
Talsma, W.; Ye, G.; Sengrian, A. A.; Souza, P. C. T.; Loi, M. A.;
Chiechi, R. C.; Marrink, S. J.; Hummelen, J. C.; Koster, L. J. A.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13038

Enhancing Molecular N-Type Doping of Donor-Acceptor Copoly-
mers by Tailoring Side Chains. Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1704630.
(4) Meng, B.; Song, H.; Chen, X.; Xie, Z.; Liu, J.; Wang, L.
Replacing Alkyl with Oligo(Ethylene Glycol) as Side Chains of
Conjugated Polymers for Close π−π Stacking. Macromolecules 2015,
48, 4357−4363.
(5) Kiefer, D.; Giovannitti, A.; Sun, H.; Biskup, T.; Hofmann, A.;
Koopmans, M.; Cendra, C.; Weber, S.; Anton Koster, L. J.; Olsson, E.;
Rivnay, J.; Fabiano, S.; McCulloch, I.; Müller, C. Enhanced N-Doping
Efficiency of a Naphthalenediimide-Based Copolymer through Polar
Side Chains for Organic Thermoelectrics. ACS Energy Lett. 2018, 3,
278−285.
(6) Brendel, J. C.; Schmidt, M. M.; Hagen, G.; Moos, R.; Thelakkat,
M. Controlled Synthesis of Water-Soluble Conjugated Polyelectro-
lytes Leading to Excellent Hole Transport Mobility. Chem. Mater.
2014, 26, 1992−1998.
(7) Schmidt, M. M.; ElMahmoudy, M.; Malliaras, G. G.; Inal, S.;
Thelakkat, M. Smaller Counter Cation for Higher Transconductance
in Anionic Conjugated Polyelectrolytes. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2018,
219, 1700374.
(8) Schmode, P.; Ohayon, D.; Reichstein, P. M.; Savva, A.; Inal, S.;
Thelakkat, M. High-Performance Organic Electrochemical Transistors
Based on Conjugated Polyelectrolyte Copolymers. Chem. Mater.
2019, 31, 5286−5295.
(9) Inal, S.; Rivnay, J.; Suiu, A.-O.; Malliaras, G. G.; McCulloch, I.
Conjugated Polymers in Bioelectronics. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51,
1368−1376.
(10) Zhao, H.; Zhu, B.; Sekine, J.; Luo, S.-C.; Yu, H. Oligoethylene-
Glycol-Functionalized Polyoxythiophenes for Cell Engineering:
Syntheses, Characterizations, and Cell Compatibilities. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2012, 4, 680−686.
(11) Collier, G. S.; Pelse, I.; Reynolds, J. R. Aqueous Electrolyte
Compatible Electrochromic Polymers Processed from an Environ-
mentally Sustainable Solvent. ACS Macro Lett. 2018, 7, 1208−1214.
(12) Goel, M.; Heinrich, C. D.; Krauss, G.; Thelakkat, M. Principles
of Structural Design of Conjugated Polymers Showing Excellent
Charge Transport toward Thermoelectrics and Bioelectronics
Applications. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2019, 1800915.
(13) Lohwasser, R. H.; Thelakkat, M. Toward Perfect Control of
End Groups and Polydispersity in Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) via
Catalyst Transfer Polymerization. Macromolecules 2011, 44, 3388−
3397.
(14) Iovu, M. C.; Sheina, E. E.; Gil, R. R.; McCullough, R. D.
Experimental Evidence for the Quasi-“Living” Nature of the Grignard
Metathesis Method for the Synthesis of Regioregular Poly(3-
Alkylthiophenes). Macromolecules 2005, 38, 8649−8656.
(15) Yokoyama, A.; Miyakoshi, R.; Yokozawa, T. Chain-Growth
Polymerization for Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) with a Defined Molecular
Weight and a Low Polydispersity. Macromolecules 2004, 37, 1169−
1171.
(16) Inal, S.; Malliaras, G. G.; Rivnay, J. Benchmarking Organic
Mixed Conductors for Transistors. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1767.
(17) Paulsen, B. D.; Tybrandt, K.; Stavrinidou, E.; Rivnay, J. Organic
Mixed Ionic−Electronic Conductors. Nat. Mater. 2020, 13.
(18) Simon, D. T.; Gabrielsson, E. O.; Tybrandt, K.; Berggren, M.
Organic Bioelectronics: Bridging the Signaling Gap between Biology
and Technology. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 13009−13041.
(19) Rivnay, J.; Inal, S.; Salleo, A.; Owens, R. M.; Berggren, M.;
Malliaras, G. G. Organic Electrochemical Transistors. Nat. Rev. Mater.
2018, 3, 17086.
(20) Cendra, C.; Giovannitti, A.; Savva, A.; Venkatraman, V.;
McCulloch, I.; Salleo, A.; Inal, S.; Rivnay, J. Role of the Anion on the
Transport and Structure of Organic Mixed Conductors. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2019, 29, 1807034.
(21) Savva, A.; Cendra, C.; Giugni, A.; Torre, B.; Surgailis, J.;
Ohayon, D.; Giovannitti, A.; McCulloch, I.; Di Fabrizio, E.; Salleo, A.;
Rivnay, J.; Inal, S. Influence of Water on the Performance of Organic
Electrochemical Transistors. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 927−937.
(22) Giovannitti, A.; Sbircea, D.-T.; Inal, S.; Nielsen, C. B.;
Bandiello, E.; Hanifi, D. A.; Sessolo, M.; Malliaras, G. G.; McCulloch,
I.; Rivnay, J. Controlling the Mode of Operation of Organic
Transistors through Side-Chain Engineering. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
2016, 113, 12017−12022.
(23) ElMahmoudy, M.; Inal, S.; Charrier, A.; Uguz, I.; Malliaras, G.
G.; Sanaur, S. Tailoring the Electrochemical and Mechanical
Properties of PEDOT:PSS Films for Bioelectronics. Macromol.
Mater. Eng. 2017, 302, 1600497.
(24) Flagg, L. Q.; Bischak, C. G.; Onorato, J. W.; Rashid, R. B.;
Luscombe, C. K.; Ginger, D. S. Polymer Crystallinity Controls Water
Uptake in Glycol Side-Chain Polymer Organic Electrochemical
Transistors. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 4345−4354.
(25) Dong, B. X.; Nowak, C.; Onorato, J. W.; Strzalka, J.; Escobedo,
F. A.; Luscombe, C. K.; Nealey, P. F.; Patel, S. N. Influence of Side-
Chain Chemistry on Structure and Ionic Conduction Characteristics
of Polythiophene Derivatives: A Computational and Experimental
Study. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1418−1429.
(26) Wustoni, S.; Savva, A.; Sun, R.; Bihar, E.; Inal, S. Enzyme-Free
Detection of Glucose with a Hybrid Conductive Gel Electrode. Adv.
Mater. Interfaces 2018, 6, 1800928.
(27) Heinrich, C. D.; Thelakkat, M. Poly-(3-Hexylthiophene)
Bottlebrush Copolymers with Tailored Side-Chain Lengths and
High Charge Carrier Mobilities. J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4, 5370−
5378.
(28) Balko, J.; Lohwasser, R. H.; Sommer, M.; Thelakkat, M.;
Thurn-Albrecht, T. Determination of the Crystallinity of Semicrystal-
line Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) by Means of Wide-Angle X-Ray
Scattering. Macromolecules 2013, 46, 9642−9651.
(29) Balko, J.; Portale, G.; Lohwasser, R. H.; Thelakkat, M.; Thurn-
Albrecht, T. Surface Induced Orientation and Vertically Layered
Morphology in Thin Films of Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) Crystallized
from the Melt. J. Mater. Res. 2017, 32, 1957−1968.
(30) Mei, J.; Kim, D. H.; Ayzner, A. L.; Toney, M. F.; Bao, Z.
Siloxane-Terminated Solubilizing Side Chains: Bringing Conjugated
Polymer Backbones Closer and Boosting Hole Mobilities in Thin-
Film Transistors. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 20130−20133.
(31) Wustoni, S.; Combe, C.; Ohayon, D.; Akhtar, M. H.;
McCulloch, I.; Inal, S. Membrane-Free Detection of Metal Cations
with an Organic Electrochemical Transistor. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019,
29, 1904403.
(32) Liu, F.; Chen, D.; Wang, C.; Luo, K.; Gu, W.; Briseno, A. L.;
Hsu, J. W. P.; Russell, T. P. Molecular Weight Dependence of the
Morphology in P3HT:PCBM Solar Cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2014, 6, 19876−19887.
(33) Proctor, C. M.; Rivnay, J.; Malliaras, G. G. Understanding
Volumetric Capacitance in Conducting Polymers. J. Polym. Sci., Part
B: Polym. Phys. 2016, 54, 1433−1436.
(34) Sivaraman, P.; Mishra, S. P.; Bhattacharrya, A. R.; Thakur, A.;
Shashidhara, K.; Samui, A. B. Effect of Regioregularity on Specific
Capacitance of Poly(3-Hexylthiophene). Electrochim. Acta 2012, 69,
134−138.
(35) Savva, A.; Wustoni, S.; Inal, S. Ionic-to-Electronic Coupling
Efficiency in PEDOT:PSS Films Operated in Aqueous Electrolytes. J.
Mater. Chem. C 2018, 6, 12023−12030.
(36) Rodahl, M.; Kasemo, B. A Simple Setup to Simultaneously
Measure the Resonant Frequency and the Absolute Dissipation Factor
of a Quartz Crystal Microbalance. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 1996, 67, 3238−
3241.
(37) Rodahl, M.; Höök, F.; Krozer, A.; Brzezinski, P.; Kasemo, B.
Quartz Crystal Microbalance Setup for Frequency and Q -factor
Measurements in Gaseous and Liquid Environments. Rev. Sci. Instrum.
1995, 66, 3924−3930.
(38) Höök, F.; Rodahl, M.; Brzezinski, P.; Kasemo, B. Energy
Dissipation Kinetics for Protein and Antibody−Antigen Adsorption
under Shear Oscillation on a Quartz Crystal Microbalance. Langmuir
1998, 14, 729−734.
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
www.acsami.org
Research Article
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21604
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 13029−13039
13039

