Side chain engineering control of mixed
conduction in oligoethylene glycol-substituted
polythiophenes†
Jonathan W. Onorato,‡a Zhongyang Wang,
‡b Yangyang Sun,
c
Christian Nowak,
c Lucas Q. Flagg,
d Ruipeng Li,e Ban Xuan Dong,b
Lee J. Richter,
d Fernando A. Escobedo,
c Paul F. Nealey,b Shrayesh N. Patel
b
and Christine K. Luscombe
*afg
A major limitation for polymeric mixed ionic/electronic conductors (MIECs) is the trade-oﬀbetween ionic
and electronic conductivity; changes made that improve one typically hinder the other. In order to address
this fundamental problem, this work provides insight into ways that we could improve one type of
conduction without hindering the other. We investigated a common oligoethylene glycol side chain
polymer by adjusting the oxygen atom content and position, providing structural insights for materials
that better balanced the two conduction pathways. The investigated polymer series showed the
prototypical conﬂict between ionic and electronic conduction for oxygen atom content, with increasing
oxygen atom content increasing ionic conductivity, but decreasing electronic conductivity; however, by
increasing the oxygen atom distance from the polymer backbone, both ionic and electronic conductivity
could be improved. Following these rules, we show that poly(3-(methoxyethoxybutyl)thiophene), when
blended
with
lithium
bistriﬂuoromethanesulfonimide
(LiTFSI),
matches
the
ionic
conductivity
of
a comparable MIEC [poly(3-(methoxyethoxyethoxymethyl)thiophene)], while simultaneously showing
higher electronic conductivity, highlighting the potential of this design strategy. We also provide
strategies for tuning the MIEC performance to ﬁt a desired application, depending on if electronic, ionic,
or balanced conduction is most important. These results have implications beyond just polythiophene-
based MIECs, as these strategies for balancing backbone crystallization and coordinating group
interconnectivity apply for all semicrystalline conjugated polymers.
1.
Introduction
Polymer-based mixed ionic/electronic conductors (MIECs) are
receiving increased attention, in part due to their utility across
a wide-range of applications. MIECs show valuable properties,
including volumetric capacitance changes, transduction of
ionic and electronic signals, and biocompatibility.1–5 These
properties result in a number of useful features, enabling their
use in applications such as batteries and ultracapacitors, (bio)
sensors, actuators, and organic electrochemical transistors
(OECTs).6–8 Homopolymer MIECs originally showed limited
ionic mobility due to their highly hydrophobic backbones.9,10
There has been a signicant improvement in their ionic
conductivity by introducing polar groups into the solubilizing
side chains; the most popular chemistry for the polar side
chains is oligoethylene glycol (oEG).11–13 This strategy of intro-
ducing oEG has driven signicant improvements in MIEC
performance
in
a
number
of
conjugated
polymer
backbones.1,14–16
Side chains are known to have a profound inuence on the
morphology, crystallinity, charge carrier concentration, charge
thermal stability and ion/water uptake properties of conjugated
polymers. When the alkyl side chain of poly[2,7-uorene-alt-5,5-
(4,7-di-2-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] was replaced by oEG
side chain, the energy barrier of rotating O–CH2 in oEG side
chain was smaller than that of rotating CH2–CH2. Compared to
the conjugated polymer with alkyl side chain, the more exible
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA 98195, USA. E-mail: luscombe@uw.edu
bPritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
cSchool of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY,
USA
dMaterials Science and Engineering Division, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA
eNational Synchrotron Light Source II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New
York, 11973, USA
fMolecular Engineering and Sciences Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA
gDepartment of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
† Electronic
supplementary
information
(ESI)
available.
See
DOI:
10.1039/d1ta05379e
‡ These two authors contributed equally to the work.
Cite this: DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05379e
Received 25th June 2021
Accepted 29th August 2021
DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05379e
rsc.li/materials-a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
J. Mater. Chem. A
Journal of
Materials Chemistry A
PAPER
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online
View Journal

oEG side chain of conjugated polymer resulted in a tighter p–p
stacking,
higher
crystallinity,
and
higher
charge
carrier
mobility.17,18 For MIECs, the side chains have a two-fold eﬀect as
side chains not only inuence morphology and thus electronic
conductivity, but also because the side chains contain ion-
solvating groups that are responsible for ionic conduction. An
example of this comes from a naphthalenediimide polymer,
where swapping some of the alkyl side chains for oEGs results
in a change in morphology and a concomitant three order of
magnitude drop in mobility, but also the introduction of ionic
conductivity.16 The manner of attachment of the oEG chains
also has a dramatic impact, where increasing the distance
between the rst oxygen atom in the polymer side chain and the
polymer
backbone
improves
both
ionic
and
electronic
conductivity, due to increased oxygen atom range of motion and
less steric hinderance of the polymer p-stacking behavior.15 A
similar study in polythiophenes shows that by changing the
linking strategy (without spacer, with methyl, and ethyl spacer)
between the rst oxygen atom in the oEG chain and the thio-
phene backbone, the crystallinity, water uptake and ion uptake
change dramatically, which directly aﬀects volumetric capaci-
tance (C*), transconductance (gm), and gure of merit (mOECTC*)
in fabricated OECTs.19
It is clear that there is wide variation in the performance of
MIEC systems based on the manner of attachment of the oEG
side chains, but it is currently not understood how modifying
the oEG side chain itself inuences the resultant ionic and
electronic conductivity.20 A signicant consideration is to
understand how the side chain's oxygen content and position
inuences
the
resulting
polymer
morphology,
electronic
conductivity, and ionic conductivity. Herein we investigate
a series of polymers with reduced oxygen content relative to the
diethylene glycol chain of the MIEC, poly(3-(methoxyethox-
yethoxymethyl)thiophene) [P3MEEMT].15,19 We rst explored 6
permutations of this oEG-substituted polythiophene with a 9-
atom side chain using molecular dynamics (MD). The struc-
tures of these polymers are shown in Fig. 1.
These
simulations
illustrated
the
importance
of
the
increasing solvation site connectivity, showing that reducing
the side chain oxygen content while maintaining a high oxygen
atom range of motion leads to a high simulated ionic conduc-
tivity. Based on those results, we synthesized a subset of those
polymers and characterized their solid-state structure, elec-
tronic conductivity, and ionic conductivity across a range of
lithium
bistriuoromethanesulfonimide
(LiTFSI)
concentrations. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) and grazing inci-
dence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) data show that by
increasing the distance between coordinating groups and the
polymer backbone, greater degrees of organization and crys-
tallinity are achieved, even with high concentrations of LiTFSI.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) highlights that
these modied structures and the improved molecular ordering
results in improved electronic conductivity as compared to
P3MEEMT and other polymers with coordinating groups near
the polymer backbone. Ionic conductivity also tends to increase
with this distance, though oxygen atom content in the side
chain also plays a contributing role. Too much oxygen
(P3MEEMT) coordinates Li+ too strongly, inhibiting ion motion,
but too little oxygen limits LiTFSI solubility and reduces solva-
tion site connectivity, resulting in reduced ionic conductivity.
The best balance is observed in poly(3-(methoxyethoxybutyl)
thiophene) [P3APPT], which, with its two oxygen atoms far from
the polymer backbone, shows reasonably strong electronic and
ionic conductivity. By studying this range of polymers across
LiTFSI doping concentrations, we are able to elucidate how
variations in the side chain architecture inuence the evolution
of morphology with increasing levels of LiTFSI doping, high-
lighting the importance of the architecture of oEG side chains
in determining the blended material's morphology and resul-
tant ionic and electronic conductivity.
2.
Methods
2.1
Material synthesis
The detailed monomer and polymer synthesis and character-
ization are described in the ESI Section S.1.†
2.2
Thin lm sample preparation
Polythiophene derivatives (P3PAAT, P3AAPT, P3APPT, and
P3PPAT) were dissolved overnight in chlorobenzene (CB) at
a concentration of 10 mg mL1 inside an argon-lled glove box.
LiTFSI was similarly dissolved overnight at 10 mg mL1 in
acetonitrile (ACN) in an argon glovebox. Polymer:LiTFSI blends
were prepared at a range of concentrations normalized against
the number of ethylene oxide units (EO) in each polymer side
chains, targeting molar ratios of r ¼ [Li+]/[EO] ¼ 0 (neat poly-
mer), 0.01, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15. For P3AAPT and P3PAAT, this results
in a CB/ACN ratio of 4 : 1000, 37 : 1000, 74 : 1000, and
111 : 1000,
and
for
P3APPT
and
P3PPAT
of
14.8 : 1000,
74 : 1000,
158 : 1000,
and
222 : 1000.
These
blends
were
prepared by ltering polymer solutions through a syringe lter,
and then adding LiTFSI/ACN solution to achieve the desired
ratio. Following addition of LiTFSI/ACN, the blended solutions
were allowed to stir for several hours prior to use to ensure
equilibrium mixing. All substrates used for preparing thin lm
samples were rinsed with acetone and isopropanol several
times followed by ozone plasma treatment for 10 min. Thin lm
samples were prepared by spin casting solutions on substrates
at 2000 rpm (60 rpm ¼ 2p rad s1) for 2 min. Film thickness of
all samples ranged from 50 nm to 70 nm, as conrmed by
spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements.
Fig. 1
Full list of possible oligoethylene glycol permutations with a 9
atom-length side chains, as investigated using molecular dynamics.
J. Mater. Chem. A
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Paper
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

2.3
1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
NMR spectra for small molecules was taken using a 300 MHz
Bruker§ AV-300 spectrometer, and spectra for polymers was
taken using a 500 MHz Bruker AV-500 spectrometer. All spectra
were taken in CDCl3 at room temperature.
2.4
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC)
SEC was performed using a Malvern Viscotek TDA 305 with an
attached UV detector using polystyrene molecular weight
references. THF at 40 C and a ow rate of 1 mL min1 was used
as an eluent.
2.5
Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy
The UV-vis measurements were performed using a Shimadzu
UV-3600 Plus dual beam spectrophotometer at the SoMatter
Characterization Facility (SMCF) at the University of Chicago.
2.6
Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
The surface topographies of thin lm samples were character-
ized by a Cypher ES AFM (Asylum Research Oxford) with FS-
15000AuD cantilever at room temperature. The images were
acquired using tapping mode and analyzed by using Gwyddion
soware.21
2.7
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
TGA was performed using a TA Instruments Q50 with a heating
rate of 10 C min1 under a nitrogen environment.
2.8
Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
DSC traces were taken on a Mettler Toledo DSC 3+. Blend
samples were prepared by preparing a mixed solution of LiTFSI
and polymer at the appropriate ratio, r, and then were drop cast
into the sample pan at room temperature. Samples were taken
through a heat/cool/heat cycle from 90 C to temperature
maximums as dictated by their thermal degradation charac-
teristics (175 C or 225 C). Samples were heated and cooled at
a 10 C min1 rate and were kept under nitrogen ow during the
experiment.
2.9
Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS)
Films of each polymer were prepared as described above
(Section 2.2) with varying LiTFSI concentration on 1 cm2 silicon
substrates. The data was collected at Brookhaven National Lab,
National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II), 11-BM Complex
Materials Scattering beamline using a 13.5 keV incident X-ray,
a detector distance of 258 mm and a 0.14 angle of incidence
with respect to the substrate. The detector calibration was per-
formed relative to a silver behenate crystal. GIWAXS data was
processed using the Nika soware package for Wavemetrics
Igor Pro.22,23 Out of plane linecuts are sector averages 10 wide
centered around 90. In plane line cuts are horizontal lines 5
pixels wide centered 9 pixels above the horizon.
2.10
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and DC
measurements
Conductivity measurements were performed on top of inter-
digitated electrode arrays (IDEs) using a Gamry 600+ potentio-
stat inside an argon-lled glovebox. Samples were quickly
transferred in air between the lm-processing glovebox and the
testing glovebox. The fabrication details of the IDEs can be
found in our previous report.24 The electrical contact was made
by using two customized probes with the help of manipulators
(Semiprobe Inc.) The EIS was conducted with an applied 60 mV
voltage from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz at diﬀerent temperatures. The
ionic (Ri) and/or electronic resistance (Re) data were then
extracted from the impedance spectrum by tting an equivalent
circuit, with representative examples being shown in Fig. 8. The
conductivity s of the thin lm sample was calculated using the
following equation:15,25
si=e ¼
1
Ri=e
d
lðN  1Þh
(1)
where Ri/e is ionic/electronic resistance, d is the spacing
between adjacent electrode teeth (8 mm), l, the length of the
electrode (1000 mm), N is the number of electrodes (160), and h
is the thickness of the lm.
For DC measurements, potentials between 100 mV to 200 mV
with a step of 5 mV s1 were applied on P3AAPT polymer lms to
verify the electronic conductivities extracted from the equiva-
lent circuits. The current response was measured using a Gamry
600+ potentiostat and the sample preparation method is the
same compared to AC impedance measurements. Conductivity
values obtained by DC measurements are derived from eqn (1)
and Ohm's law. All conductivity values are from AC impedance
unless stated otherwise.
2.11
Computational simulations
Following our previous study,15 an all-atom model is used to
simulate the polymer species shown in Fig. 1. Crystalline and
amorphous morphologies are generated for each species. The
ion mobility is evaluated by calculating the mean squared
displacement
(MSD)
of
simulation
trajectories.
Umbrella
sampling is implemented to investigate the dissociation energy
of Li+ and TFSI ion in every targeted polymer. Simulation
details are shown in the ESI Section S.6.†
3.
Results and discussion
3.1
Molecular dynamics investigations
A common problem in exploring novel polymer chemistries is
the time-intensive nature of polymer synthesis. As such, to
explore the performance across the full spread of possible side
chain oxygen permutations, we rst turned to MD to build
understanding of the polymer performance and select the best
candidates
for
synthesis.
The
full
range
of
polymers
§ Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identied in this
paper
in
order to
specify the
experimental procedure adequately. Such
identication is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by
NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identied are
necessarily the best available for the purpose.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
J. Mater. Chem. A
Paper
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

investigated are shown in Fig. 1, with P3MEEMT shown for
reference. The polymers are named based on the pattern of
inclusion of an ethylene oxide polar moiety (P), or a three-
carbon alkyl (A) unit, moving outward from the polymer back-
bone. The previously studied P3MEEMT is shown for reference.
In the convention of this paper, P3MEEMT would be P3PPPT
(Fig. S21†), but we will use the original nomenclature in this
paper.
Two distinct morphologies were targeted for each side chain
modied polymer, crystalline and amorphous (see Section
S.6.1† for procedures for structure generation). Representative
crystalline structures generated are shown in Fig. 3 and will be
discussed later in this section. In order to normalize for the
diﬀerences in oxygen content in the polymer side chain and
thus changes in dissolution power for the diﬀerent chemistries,
we calculated an eﬀective dissociation energy for an LiTFSI
molecule for each of the polymers in the crystalline and amor-
phous states. The method is described in greater detail in the
ESI (Section S.6.3†), but briey, a molecule of LiTFSI was
randomly placed into the simulated crystalline or amorphous
polymer structure and allowed to equilibrate. Then, the Li+ and
TFSI ions were separated until the energy equilibrated, and the
resultant potential of mean force (PMF), or energy, change
between the initial (associated) and nal (dissociated) states
were measured and reported as an eﬀective dissociation energy
(Ed). The measured Ed represents the approximate “diﬃculty” of
dissociating an LiTFSI molecule and can serve as a proxy for the
solubility of LiTFSI.26,27 The energy prole during the dissocia-
tion process for the crystalline polymer structures are shown in
Fig. 2A, and the calculated LiTFSI Ed values for the crystalline
polymers are summarized in Fig. 2B. The trends in PMF and Ed
are largely the same in the amorphous polymers, though the
amorphous simulations typically show slightly lower Ed, as re-
ported in Fig. S21.†
Fig. 2A highlights that there are 4 distinct groupings of PMF
proles, highlighted in diﬀerent colors. We can see that these
data generally show a correlation between the number of oxygen
atoms per side chain and the observed Ed or PMF, with
increasing oxygen content leading to a lower Ed and PMF. Two
samples are outliers in this trend: P3AAPT and P3APPT, having
markedly lower Ed than other one and two oxygen atom coun-
terparts, respectively. This lower Ed implies that something
about their structure is enabling these two polymers to
outperform simple oxygen concentration considerations for Ed.
To understand this variation in observed PMF and Ed,
proles of the simulated structures were generated. The regular
arrangement of the polymer backbones, and the polar–
nonpolar interactions between oEG and alkyl domains in the
side chains results in the formation of a nanoscale phase
separation between polar and nonpolar domains. The resulting
structures are shown in Fig. 3 (complete set in Fig. S23†). In
these
crystalline
structures,
the
oxygen
atom-containing
domains are highlighted in red. From these images it can be
observed that for both P3AAPT and P3APPT, a cooperative eﬀect
between adjacent polymer backbones results in the formation
of an extended solvation domain, giving the P3APPT an eﬀective
4-oxygen atom wide domain, and P3AAPT a 2-oxygen atom wide
domain. This explains why P3AAPT performs comparably to the
two oxygen atom samples rather than the 1 oxygen atom
samples, and why P3APPT outperforms other 2 oxygen atom
samples in terms of Ed.
Ionic conductivity for all polymer samples was calculated
using MD. A brief description is given here, and a more detailed
one is presented in the ESI (Section S.6.2†). Aer generating
each structure and calculating Ed, the ionic conductivity of each
polymer system for Li+ in either the crystalline or amorphous
structures were calculated as follows. Freely dissociated Li+ ions
were placed into the polymer structure one at a time, and their
position tracked over time upon the application of an electric
eld. The fraction of mobile ions was multiplied by this dri
and normalized by Ed to account for diﬀerences in ion solu-
bility. Eqn (2) summarizes this calculation, where s is the
Fig. 2
(A) Potential of mean force associated with LiTFSI across diﬀerent cation–anion separation distances in the diﬀerent crystalline polymer
environments. (B) Extracted simulated dissociation energies for LiTFSI in diﬀerent crystalline polymer environments. Matching colors indicate
qualitatively similar groupings of PMF proﬁles. Chemical structures of P3MEEMT derivatives are inserted into the bar chart for readers'
convenience.
J. Mater. Chem. A
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Paper
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

normalized ionic conductivity, q is the ion valence (1 in this
case), v is the drivelocity, n is the number density of dissoci-
ated ions, and Ed is the dissociation energy:
s ¼
qvn
Ed
(2)
Fig. 4 shows the calculated ionic conductivity normalized
against the value for P3MEEMT. From Fig. 4, it is clear that kinetic
considerations (v  n) can dominate the population (Ed) trends.
Focusing on the crystalline samples (Fig. 4a), it is seen that the
three highest performing polymer samples have a terminal coor-
dinating atom along the side chain. This suggests that oxygen
atoms at the end of the side chain attract the ion to the end of the
chain and facilitates rapid transport. The low performers, P3PAAT,
P3PPAT, and P3APAT all have high oxygen atom density towards
the polymer backbone, limiting the hopping behavior for a coor-
dinated Li+ ion. Overall, there is a net increase in ionic conduc-
tivity when the coordinating atoms are further away from the
polymer backbone. This eﬀect is also conated with the number
of coordinating atoms in the side chain, where increasing the
number of oxygen atoms results in a reduction in ionic conduc-
tivity. When looking at the amorphous simulation data, while the
drivelocity is still dependent on having oxygen atoms at the end
of the polymer chain, it is more important that there are a signif-
icant number of oxygen atoms in the side chain. As such, all
polymers perform less well than the amorphous P3MEET. The
signicant reduction in relative performance for the amorphous
P3AAPT is likely due to a reduction in solvation site connectivity.
The associated Ed values for the polymers largely decrease
with increasing oxygen content; the outliers form extended
solvation domains across multiple polymer backbones. When
considering the overall conductivities, the population-based
trend (Ed) can be dominated instead by drikinetics (i.e. v is
more indicative of ioinc conductivity than Ed). The crystalline
conductivity depends on solvation site connectivity, with oxygen
atoms at the end of the side chain resulting in the best
conductivities; the amorphous conductivities also follow this
trend, though are also signicantly dependent upon oxygen
atom count in the side chain, with more oxygen atoms leading
to improved ionic conductivity. While crystalline conductivity is
enlightening and potentially plays a supporting role in ionic
conductivity for these polymers, it is expected that the amor-
phous domains of the conjugated polymers will be predomi-
nately responsible for ionic conduction. Based on the observed
performances and trends, and our interest in understanding
the eﬀect of the full range of possible oxygen atom content and
positioning,
the
P3AAPT,
P3APPT,
P3PAAT,
and
P3PPAT
systems were selected for experimental characterization.
3.2
Polymer morphology and LiTFSI doping
P3AAPT, P3APPT, P3PAAT, and P3PPAT were synthesized
following a Kumada Catalyst Transfer Polymerization (KCTP)
Fig. 4
Calculated ionic conductivity values for (A) crystalline and (B) amorphous polymer samples, normalized with the respective polymer
dissociation energies, and further normalized against the P3MEEMT performance (P3MEEMT ¼ 1). Chemical structures of P3MEEMT derivatives
are inserted into the bar chart for readers' convenience.
Fig. 3
Solubilizing domains of parallel polymer backbones within
a crystallite for (A) P3AAPT, (B) P3APPT, (C) P3PAAT, (D) P3PPAT. Atoms
are identiﬁed by color (see inset), with blue atoms representing side
chain carbons, and black backbone carbons.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
J. Mater. Chem. A
Paper
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

from their respective dibrominated monomers. The specic
details of the monomer and polymer syntheses are described in
the ESI (Section S.1†), with reaction schemes shown from
Fig. S1–S6† and the resultant polymer number average molec-
ular masses (Mn) shown in Table 1. The Mn are similar, thus
enabling cross-comparison between diﬀerent polymer samples.
Once prepared, polymer lms in their neat and LiTFSI-
blended states were characterized using UV-vis spectroscopy
to clarify diﬀerences in their solid-state packing behavior. A
major focus was on understanding the inuence of both oxygen
content and position on the structure and its evolution with
increasing LiTFSI content. To provide a controlled comparison
between samples, the LiTFSI content was normalized for each
polymer based upon the number of ethylene oxide repeat units
present in the side chain, following eqn (3):
r ¼
½LiTFSI
½No: of ethylene oxide repeat units
(3)
The observed UV-vis spectra are shown in Fig. 5. The unan-
nealed lms were spin-cast from chlorobenzene, a high boiling
solvent that gives a long time for self-organization and crystal-
lization.28,29 P3AAPT and P3APPT in their neat solid states show
the appearance of a vibronic progression, a feature which is
indicative of increased planarization and self-organization of
the polymer backbone.30,31 The absorption prole of both poly-
mers matches well with poly(3-hexylthiophene) [P3HT], with
nearly identical absorption onsets [P3HT onset ¼ 660 nm,
P3AAPT and P3APPT onset ¼ (657 to 664 nm)].32 Neither P3PAAT
nor P3PPAT show such a vibronic progression; this variation is
likely due to the presence of the oxygen atom adjacent to the
thiophene backbone which hinders the chain's ability to pla-
narize. As compared to P3MEEMT the absorption onsets and
maxima of P3AAPT and P3APPT are redshied consistent with
increased planarization, whereas the absorption maxima for
P3PAAT and P3PPAT are blueshied.15 This indicates that it is
not simply the oxygen atom proximal to the backbone that leads
to a blueshi. We hypothesize that the degree of ordering of the
side chain is responsible for the diﬀerence in absorption
maxima of P3MEEMT (lmax ¼ 500 nm) and P3PAAT or P3PPAT
[(466 and 473) nm, respectively]. This hypothesis is partially
supported by the DSC data. Previously, side chain crystallinity
has been observed for P3MEEMT (at 65 C), but no signicant
amount was observed in this work for P3PAAT or P3PPAT.15
Upon addition of LiTFSI there are small changes in the
absorption prole for P3AAPT and P3APPT which are best
captured in changes in the ratio between A0–0 and A0–1, as dis-
cussed in the ESI (Section S.3†), and summarized in Table
S1.†30,31 Overall, it is seen that a proximal oxygen atom results in
reductions in along-backbone ordering, and by pushing the
oxygen farther from the backbone we see improved planariza-
tion and the appearance of a vibronic progression.
It is well known that increasing along-backbone order results
in an improvement in electronic mobility in polythiophene
derivatives. Further, ionic conductivity is strongly linked to
mobility of ionically conducting groups, implying that lower
glass transition temperature (Tg) values and lower crystallinity
of side chain domains will improve ionic conductivity. Under-
standing the evolution of these structural habits of these poly-
mers is critical to understanding their ionic and electronic
conductivity performance. As such, the connection between
chemical structure and crystallinity was investigated through
several thermal characterization methods. The polymers dis-
played markedly diﬀerent decomposition temperatures as
observed through thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), as shown
in Fig. S7.† Again, a split is seen where P3AAPT and P3APPT
(>350
C) show higher decomposition temperatures than
P3PAAT (310 C) and far higher than P3PPAT (170 C), high-
lighting the destabilizing eﬀects of a proximal oxygen atom.
To better understand the crystalline behaviors of the neat
polymers diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used
across temperature ranges as dictated by the polymer decom-
position temperatures. The overlaid traces of these polymers in
their neat and LiTFSI blended states are shown in Fig. S8–S11.†
Both side chain and backbone crystallinity are considered, the
former for its importance for ionic conductivity, and the latter
for electronic charge transport. The measured melting or crys-
tallization temperatures and embodied enthalpies for the
diﬀerent thermal transitions are listed in Table S2.†
Comparing the neat samples, it is clear that both P3AAPT
and P3APPT are more crystalline than P3PAAT and P3PPAT,
with both showing clear and strong backbone and side chain
melting transitions. Both polymers show multiple overlapping
backbone melting peaks, indicating chain extended crystals
with a dispersity of crystallizable lengths.33 P3PAAT shows
a weak melting transition at an intermediate temperature,
a transition we assign to a side chain melting, though no
backbone melting. P3PPAT shows a thermal prole with no
obvious transitions.
In addition to the neat samples, DSC was performed on the
LiTFSI blended polymers to characterize their structural
evolution with the introduction of salt. P3AAPT's side chain
melting transition shows little change with LiTFSI, even up to r
¼ 0.15, indicating that the side chain crystallization habit is
minimally aﬀected by the presence of salt. The backbone-
crystallization transition changes its crystallization tempera-
tures as higher levels of LiTFSI are introduced. P3APPT, unlike
P3AAPT, has a reduction in the relative crystallinity with
increasing LiTFSI, eventually seeing full suppression of side
chain crystallinity at r ¼ 0.10 and 0.15 and signicant reduction
of the backbone crystallinity at r ¼ 0.15. This could imply that
the P3AAPT crystallinity is less sensitive to LiTFSI introduction,
though it is also possible this diﬀerence could be due to the
greater molar concentration of LiTFSI in P3APPT at the same r
relative to P3AAPT. There is also an initial backbone peak
broadening and reduction in peak size, which eventually splits
Table 1
Polymer number average molecular mass (Mn) and dispersity
(Đ) for all polymer samples from SEC
P3AAPT
P3APPT
P3PAAT
P3PPAT
Mn (kg mol1)
12.4
10.5
9.1
12.4
Đ
1.4
1.5
1.9
1.5
J. Mater. Chem. A
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Paper
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

the melting signal into two distinct peaks at high LiTFSI (r ¼
0.15). This new phase is not a pure LiTFSI crystal, as the
temperature is incorrect for an LiTFSI transition (Tm ¼ 234 C,
Tsolid–solid ¼ 152 C), and may instead be some form of mixed
phase.34
Both P3PAAT and P3PPAT have largely featureless DSC
proles, excluding the already-discussed neat P3PAAT. It was
not possible to condently determine Tg values for any of the
polymers at any LiTFSI level, a problem commonly seen in
polythiophenes.35,36 Overall, we see that when oxygen atoms are
close to the backbone, backbone crystallization is limited. The
lack of a backbone melt, in addition to the relatively high degree
of backbone torsion as seen in the UV-vis, suggests that P3PAAT
and P3PPAT will have poorer electronic conductivity than either
P3AAPT or P3APPT, as typically strong p-stacking and backbone
order is needed in polythiophene-based electronic conductors.
This DSC analysis was complemented by GIWAXS, to better
understand the nature of the structural evolution of the crys-
talline regions of the polymer with increasing LiTFSI concen-
tration. A gure of all observed linecuts from the in and out of
plane directions are presented for all polymers and LiTSFI
concentrations in Fig. S12,† and the raw diﬀractograms are
shown in Fig. S13.† A summarized comparison of the neat and r
¼ 0.15 lms of all polymers in the in and out of plane directions
are shown in Fig. 6.
The P3AAPT crystal structure seems to be relatively robust
and unchanging upon introduction of LiTFSI, retaining higher
ordered side chain reection peaks, as well as most of the
relatively strong diﬀraction intensity, in both the (100) and (010)
directions, an observation that aligns with the DSC data.
P3APPT shows a similar degree of robustness in the crystal
structure, though to a lesser degree than seen for P3AAPT, again
correlating well with the DSC data. The (100) peak maintains
a high intensity throughout, but the (200) diminishes at high
LiTFSI loading. The (300) peak follows an unusual evolution as
it initially fades, but eventually increases signicantly at r ¼
0.15. This increase coincides with the appearance of a new peak
at q ¼ 1.4 ˚A1. It is possible that these two changes correspond
to the new p-stack melting temperature observed in the DSC
data also at r ¼ 0.15 and could be indicative of a new crystalline
phase. Alternatively, this “(300)” peak could instead be the
(001), allowed by the formation of an ordered alloy of P3APPT
with LiTFSI, the diﬀraction peak of which would occur at
a similar position as the (300).
P3PAAT's diﬀractogram shows a reduction in diﬀraction
intensity for all peaks except the (100) with increasing LiTFSI
concentration. In the in plane direction we see an initial small
(010) peak that is suppressed at r ¼ 0.15; the out of plane
direction shows little to no (010) diﬀraction intensity for all
levels of LiTFSI. P3PPAT exhibits a variety of small changes in
the diﬀraction pattern with increasing r, the most notable of
which is the disappearance of the initially relatively weak (200)
peak at r ¼ 0.10 and 0.15. Through this, the (300) peak appears
Fig. 5
UV-vis absorption spectra for all polymers with LiTFSI doping. For P3AAPT (A) and P3APPT (B) the 0–0 and 0–1 transitions are marked with
vertical lines to aid the eye.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
J. Mater. Chem. A
Paper
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

relatively unchanging in intensity. The (010) peak appears to be
relatively consistent in the out of plane direction.
All lms are predominately edge-on with P3AAPT and
P3APPT showing a moderate amount of mixed (face and edge)
character, though all but P3PAAT show a discernable fraction of
isotropic diﬀraction. This edge-on behavior is similar to what
has been observed in other oEG-substituted thiophenes.1,15,19,37
The observed (100) d-spacings are somewhat similar, with
P3APPT (19.7 ˚A) being smaller than the rest, (20.5 to 21.9) ˚A,
indicating a more coiled side chain architecture. All polymers
have nearly identical (010) d-spacings, (3.72 to 3.83) ˚A. The d-
spacings for all observed peaks across all samples are shown in
Table S2.† Comparing the r ¼ 0.15 data as shown in Fig. 6C and
D, further emphasizes the side chain driven diﬀerences. As salt
is taken into the crystal structure, the side chain distance
increases to accommodate the additional molecules. Due to the
extra swelling of the P3APPT, it is instead the P3PAAT system
which shows the smallest r ¼ 0.15 (100) d-spacing, at 21.9 ˚A.
Because of the initially small d-spacing of P3APPT, in spite of
the P3APPT high swelling percentage P3AAPT remains the
largest d-spacing, at 24.9 ˚A, as compared to P3PPAT (22.8 ˚A) and
P3APPT (22.8 ˚A). As with the neat lms, the (010) d-spacing
remains relatively comparable across all polymers (3.74 to 3.86)
˚A. The molecular orientation also switches for some samples,
with P3PPAT adopting a face-on conguration, and P3AAPT
switching to a mixed face on and edge on conguration.
The variations in d-spacing were summarized by their
percent change, or swelling, in Fig. 7A for the (100) plane, and
Fig. 7B for the (010) plane. The swelling percentages reported
herein are derived from taking the (100) and the (010) plane d-
spacings in a singular direction (in plane or out of plane across
all r) and comparing against the neat d-spacing. The full table of
measured peak positions and d-spacing for each crystallo-
graphic peak are shown in the ESI, in Table S3,† and the percent
swelling is shown in Table S4.† The p-stacking direction shows
no signicant variation about their equilibrium d-spacing,
indicating minimal impact of LiTFSI introduction on the (010)
spacing for all polymer side chain architectures, as shown in
Fig. 7B. This result aligns well with P3MEEMT data, as well as
other polythiophenes blended with lithium salts.37–39 These
polymers do not demonstrate the typical reduction in the (010)
spacing characteristic in highly doped polythiophenes, indi-
cating that there is not a signicant amount of electronic
doping occurring.40 The (100) direction instead shows large
changes with LiTFSI. As side chains are expected to be
responsible for solvating the dissolved ions, we correlate the
increasing side chain distance with an increase in the amount
of LiTFSI ions incorporated into the polymer crystal structure.
P3APPT experiences the greatest amount of swelling, followed
Fig. 6
(A) In plane and (B) out of plane diﬀraction cuts of neat polymer samples. (C) In plane and (D) out of plane diﬀraction cuts at r ¼ 0.15 for all
polymers. Note that traces are oﬀset vertically for visual clarity. Diﬀerent crystallographic direction peak locations are bounded with boxes and
labelled for clarity. To enable visibility of weaker features in P3PPAT, the out of plane, neat diﬀraction (B) was multiplied by a 3 multiplication
factor.
J. Mater. Chem. A
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Paper
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

by P3AAPT, then P3PPAT, and nally P3PAAT. Comparing
against the swelling proles for P3MEEMT and P3MEET, also
oEG-substituted
polythiophenes,
P3PAAT
shows
similar
swelling behavior, initially swelling then saturating, though it
saturates at a much lower swelling percentage.15 P3AAPT,
P3APPT, and P3PPAT instead show more continuous uptake of
LiTFSI, indicating a more balanced solubility between the
crystalline and amorphous regions.15 The lack of continued
swelling for P3PAAT above r ¼ 0.05 is potentially due to the
saturation of the crystallite phase with LiTFSI; it is possible that
this saturation occurs in the amorphous regions as well, but due
to the lack of a distinct LiTFSI diﬀraction pattern widespread
phase separation is unlikely. It should be noted that for all
polymers and LiTFSI concentrations, AFM data indicates
minimal change in the surface morphology, even upon
appearance of the new melting transitions and diﬀraction
signals (Fig. S14†).
P3AAPT sees a higher (100) swelling percentage than that
observed for P3PAAT. This is consistent with the hypothesis that
by having the polymer side chains between adjacent crystalline
backbones able to organize into an “EO-layer” as shown in
Fig. 3, the crystalline domains (and potentially also the amor-
phous domains) are better able to solubilize Li salts. A larger
domain, as seen in P3APPT, further increases that crystalline
solubility as evidenced by the larger degree of swelling. This
highlights that not only the amount of oxygen atoms or their
relative range of motion, but also their degree of interconnec-
tedness, or solvation site connectivity, has a signicant impact
on solubility in these polymers. Overall, it is clear that there is
salt uptake into the crystalline and amorphous regions for all
four polymers, with no large-scale phase segregation.
3.3
Electronic and ionic conductivity
To probe the electronic and ionic conductivity of the polymers,
samples with a range of LiTFSI concentrations were prepared by
spin coating thin lms on a set of interdigitated electrodes, then
characterized using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS). An alternating current was applied with varying frequen-
cies, and the impedance data was t with an equivalent circuit
model to extract ionic and electronic conductivities for each
polymer sample. An optical image of the electrodes, and
representative Nyquist plots and equivalent circuit models are
shown in Fig. 8. EIS shows the dominant conductivity pathways
for charge in a polymer sample; if the ionic and electronic
conductivity are not relatively balanced, EIS will only be able to
detect the dominant pathway. The plots in Fig. 9 show the
measurable data points – any data points not shown are absent
due to their being too low to measure or being orders of
magnitude
lower
intensity
than
another
conduction
mechanism.
When considering electronic conductivity, there are contri-
butions from not only the mobility, but also charge carrier
concentration. Usually, intrinsic charge carrier concentrations
in conjugated polymers are the result of chemical defects from
the synthesis. All four polymers demonstrate some amount of
electronic conductivity, though there are signicant diﬀerences
between the diﬀerent polymer structures and LiTFSI concen-
trations. All four polymers were synthesized and puried
following identical procedures and thus would be expected to
have similar intrinsic defects and chemical impurities. As such,
we expect that any diﬀerences in the electronic conductivity are
due to diﬀerences in how the polymer structure interacts with
oxygen, as well as the introduced LiTFSI. Atmospheric oxygen
and ozone have been shown to have a signicant impact on
electronic conductivity, by doping the polymer backbone and
increasing the charge carrier density; this doping process is
reversible under certain conditions, including heating above
the glass transition temperature, or under vacuum exposure.41,42
LiTFSI is commonly considered to not be a dopant molecule in
polythiophenes, but some forms of LiTFSI-assisted doping
process have been observed to occur.43
Exemplary Nyquist plots with inserted equivalent tting are
shown in Fig. 8B–D, the assessment and generation of which are
discussed here. For P3APPT with r ¼ 0.05, the Nyquist plots
consist of two semicircles, which is a signature of mixed con-
ducting behavior of electrons and ions. The diameter in the rst
semicircle on the lecorresponds to the combined contribution
of ionic resistance (Rion) and electronic resistance (Re). The total
diameter of both semicircles towards the right corresponds to
Fig. 7
Swelling of the (A) (100) and (B) (010) directions upon introduction of LiTFSI.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
J. Mater. Chem. A
Paper
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

the Re. To quantify the mixed conductivities of ions and elec-
trons, EIS data were t to an equivalent circuit with two parallel
resistors, Re and Rion, indicating a simultaneous conduction of
ions and electrons. For P3AAPT without LiTFSI dopants (neat
P3AAPT), the Nyquist plots consist of one semicircle. The
diameter of the semicircle corresponds to the Re. P3APPT with
LiTSFI at temperatures >100 C was t to an equivalent circuit
with only one resistor Rion, due to the negligible electronic
conduction at high temperature.44
P3AAPT shows high electronic conductivity, dominating its
ionic conductivity for the majority of temperatures and LiTFSI
concentrations. The electronic conductivity is also maintained
across the full range of tested temperatures, likely due to the
relatively high backbone melting temperature. It's notable that
there is a nearly 2 order of magnitude increase in electronic
conductivity upon introduction of LiTFSI at the relatively small
loading r ¼ 0.01. The high electronic conductivities of P3AAPT
were conrmed with DC measurements. As shown in Fig. S24,†
Fig. 8
(A) Schematic top and side views of the interdigitated electrode arrays (IDEs). Exemplary Nyquist plots with insets showing equivalent
circuits used for ﬁtting the data and extracting relevant conductivity data for P3APPT at r ¼ 0.05 (B), P3AAPT at r ¼ 0 (C), and P3APPT at r ¼ 0.05
(D). The solid markers corresponds to the experimental data and the curves correspond to the ﬁt using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset.
Fig. 9
Summarized extracted EIS data, showing electronic conductivity (A) and ionic conductivity (B) for all polymers and all LiTFSI concen-
trations (r). Note that the relative error is small, and the resultant error bars overlap the data point markers.
J. Mater. Chem. A
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Paper
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

the electronic conductivities of P3AAPT extracted from EIS and
DC measurements are comparable. The maximum electronic
conductivity of P3AAPT at r ¼ 0.1 was calculated to be 6.72 
103 S cm1 from EIS and 6.4  103 S cm1 from DC, indi-
cating that the measured conductivity arises from electronic
transport. Similar, albeit smaller, enhancements in electronic
conductivity with LiTFSI introduction are seen in the other
polymer systems, likely for similar reasons. For P3APPT and
P3PPAT, the increases in electronic conductivity with LiTFSI
saturate at higher loading, eventually reversing the trend and
causing a reduction in electronic conductivity with increasing
LiTFSI.
The increased electronic conductivity of P3AAPT upon the
addition of LiTFSI does not seem to be connected to a crystal-
line morphology change but could be due to an increased
ordering in the amorphous domain, though the changes in the
UV-vis are relatively small. More likely is the presence of elec-
tronic doping from the introduction of LiTFSI. This increased
electronic doping results in an increase in charge carrier
concentration and can also result in an improved mobility.45
Both of these increases can factor into an increase in the elec-
tronic conductivity. Similar electronic conductivity performance
has also been seen in P3HT homopolymer and P3HT:PEO block
copolymers, with several orders of magnitude increases in
conductivity with LiTFSI addition.44 D. Mombr´u et al. demon-
strates that LiTFSI salts can eﬀectively work as electron accep-
tors when located near the thiophene rings in P3HT through the
formation of p–Li chemical bonds with an anchoring mecha-
nism, permitting hole doping of the thiophene ring.46
It's notable that though there is only a limited window of
observable ionic conductivity of P3AAPT due to the dominant
electronic transport, at a high salt loading and temperature it
appears to be outperforming the P3PAAT and is roughly
comparable to the P3PPAT, though it is signicantly worse than
the P3APPT. Overall, though a far stronger electronic conductor,
P3AAPT
does
show
workable
ionic
and
electronic
conductivities.
As temperature is increased for all P3APPT samples the
electronic conductivity decreases, dropping oﬀto unmeasur-
able levels above 100 C, likely due either to the onset of back-
bone melting or to thermal O2 dedoping.47 Similar reductions
are also seen in P3PAAT; given the relative lack of backbone
crystallinity in P3PAAT, this is likely due to thermal O2 dedop-
ing. There is an initial increase in electronic conductivity from r
¼ 0 to 0.01, aer which the further addition of LiTFSI results in
an electronic conductivity decrease. It seems reasonable that
the reduction in the crystallinity (as observed by the decline in
the diﬀraction intensity and the DSC thermal transitions)
correspond well to the decrease in electronic conductivity with
increasing LiTFSI concentration.48,49 The ionic conductivity of
P3APPT presents an interesting trend. As LiTFSI increases from
r ¼ 0.01 to 0.05, the ionic conductivity increases, as expected;
however, above r ¼ 0.05, the ionic conductivity remains largely
unchanging. We postulate that this is due to both incomplete
dissociation of the additional LiTFSI, and the counterbalancing
eﬀects of increasing ion concentration and increased glass
transition temperature through transient crosslinking of the
side chain, a phenomenon commonly observed in PEO-side
chain based ion conductors.50–52 The best balance between
ionic and electronic conductivities for P3APPT occurs at r ¼
0.05. It presents suﬃcient salt concentration to enable high
ionic conductivity, but not so much to cause extensive disrup-
tion of polymer crystallinity and thus decrease electronic
conductivity.
The deeply unfavorable oxygen position and low oxygen
content in P3PAAT's side chain results in extremely poor
performance as an ionic conductor and an only intermediate
performance as an electronic conductor. Much like P3APPT, the
electronic conductivity consistently decreases with increasing
temperature. As r increases electronic conductivity improves,
though the variation is relatively small. The ionic conductivity
of P3PAAT is poor across all temperatures, which could be due
to a reduced LiTFSI solubility, leading to a low eﬀective ion
concentration, or due to poor solvation site connectivity.
Due to its limited crystallinity, high oxygen content, and
oxygen atom proximity to the backbone, P3PPAT represents the
worst electronic conductor of the set with only minimal elec-
tronic conductivity, and then only at temperatures close to
ambient. The ionic conductivity of P3PPAT is of moderate
performance, and with increasing LiTFSI follows a typical
pattern of initial increase due to increased ion concentration
into an eventual reduction, possibly due to transient cross-
linking at high LiTFSI concentrations. The maximum ionic and
electronic conductivities observed for all polymers is shown in
Table 2.
Comparing the observed ionic conductivities, we see that the
measured and simulated amorphous system trends are aligned,
though the magnitude of experimental diﬀerences signicantly
exceed the simulations. Comparing P3MEEMT and P3APPT, the
simulation results showed the ionic conductivity of P3MEEMT
should be approximately twice that of P3APPT, but the
measured values are quite comparable (P3MEEMT ¼ 3.8 
104 S cm1 at 130 C and r ¼ 0.05, P3APPT ¼ 5.4  104 S cm1
at 120 C and r ¼ 0.10).15 Similarly, P3PPAT was found to
outperform P3AAPT in the simulation, but are comparable in
the experiments. While P3PAAT was simulated to be the worst
performer by a small margin, the measured ionic conductivity
was several orders of magnitude worse than P3AAPT. We attri-
bute this distinction to the eﬀects of LiTFSI solubility. It's
possible that the inuence of incomplete dissociation and the
formation of ion pairs and ion aggregates which would not be
captured by our Ed simulations, could limit the performance of
P3PAAT. Overall though, the simulations were able to capture
the trends in performance for the synthesized polymers and
provide insights into the nature of performance diﬀerences
across polymer backbones.
It is apparent that increasing the distance along the side
chain before a coordinating atom is introduced results in an
improvement of the electronic conductivity, as the two highest
performing electronic conductors are P3AAPT and P3APPT. It is
also observed that the introduction of additional coordinating
atoms also results in a reduction in electronic conductivity, as
both
P3APPT
and
P3PPAT
show
reduced
performance
compared against P3AAPT and P3PAAT, respectively. The
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
J. Mater. Chem. A
Paper
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

relative strength of this eﬀect is less than that of increasing
distance, as the electronic conductivity of P3APPT outperforms
P3PAAT. The ionic conductivity shows the same two depen-
dences, however, the relative strength is reversed, as two coor-
dinating atoms is more indicative of high ionic conductivity
than coordinating atom distance from the polymer backbone.
By introducing an additional oxygen atom further along the side
chain than in P3PAAT, as in the polymer P3PPAT, results in a 3
order of magnitude improvement in ionic conductivity, and
a polymer that outperforms even P3AAPT in spite of the limited
coordinating
atom-backbone
distance.
P3APPT,
which
combines distance and two coordinating atoms, results in the
best balance of performance. Maintaining a high number of
coordinating groups per repeat unit and high solvation site
connectivity, while also increasing the distance between coor-
dinating groups and the backbone provides a pathway to high
ionic and electronic conductivity within the same polymer
backbone.
4.
Conclusions
A series of oEG-substituted polymers with side chains contain-
ing varying oxygen contents and positions were investigated
both computationally and experimentally, seeking to under-
stand the interplay between the side chain chemical structure
and the resultant morphology, ionic conductivity, and elec-
tronic conductivity. Molecular dynamics simulations were used
to understand how changing the coordinating group position
and density would change ionic conductivity in both crystalline
and amorphous systems. For the crystalline system, reducing
the number of oxygen atoms in the polymer side chain while
moving the remaining oxygen atoms as far away from the
polymer backbone as possible maximized ionic conductivity,
while the amorphous system required more oxygen atoms at
a greater distance from the polymer backbone for high ionic
conductivity. A selection of these polymers were then synthe-
sized and characterized to understand their molecular structure
and the inuence of LiTFSI on their structure and conductivity.
The collected ionic conductivity data follow a similar trend as
seen in the MD simulations for the amorphous systems;
pushing the oxygen atom density away from the polymer
backbone improves the ionic conductivity. An additional
benet that was observed was that this increased oxygen atom
distance also resulted in improved backbone crystallinity and
results in an improvement of the electronic conductivity.
P3APPT, with the additional space between backbone and
oxygen atoms in the side chain, results in ionic conductivities
comparable to P3MEEMT while also having better electronic
conductivity. This provides insight into a strategy for designing
higher performance MIECs – increase the coordinating group
distance from the backbone and reduce the number of coordi-
nating
groups
while
maintaining
solvation
site
inter-
connectivity. From this, it is possible to adjust the balance of
ionic conductivity and electronic conductivity by adjusting the
substitution pattern of the side chain, enabling tuning of the
polymer for diﬀerent applications. One unanswered question is
whether these observed trends will be maintained when the
polymers are swelled with water during injection of hydrated
salts, as is the case with standard OECT operation. Future work
investigating such considerations will be important to under-
standing the translation of dry-state properties to operation
under solvent swelled conditions.
Author contributions
J. W. O. was responsible for conceptualization, formal analysis,
investigation, visualization, writing – original dra, and writing
– review & editing. Z. W. was responsible for conceptualization,
formal analysis, investigation, reviewing and editing. Y. S. was
responsible for conceptualization, formal analysis, investiga-
tion, and soware. C. N. was responsible for soware and
conceptualization. L. Q. F. was responsible for formal analysis
and investigation. R. L. was responsible for investigation. B. X.
D. was responsible for conceptualization. L. J. R. was respon-
sible for formal analysis and supervision. F. E. was responsible
for supervision. P. N. was responsible for supervision. S. P. was
responsible for supervision. C. K. L. was responsible for
supervision and writing – review & editing.
Conﬂicts of interest
There are no conicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part through NSF DMREF award
number 1922259. Part of this work was conducted at the
Washington Clean Energy Testbeds, a facility supported by the
state of Washington through the University of Washington
Clean Energy Institute. Part of this work was performed at the
SoMatter Characterization Facility of the University of Chi-
cago. This work made use of the Pritzker Nanofabrication
Facility of the Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering at the
University of Chicago, which receives support from Soand
Table 2
Maximum observed ionic and electronic conductivities for all polymer samples. Values are selected from a speciﬁc temperature and
LiTFSI concentration, which are listed in each cell
P3AAPT
P3APPT
P3PAAT
P3PPAT
Max ionic conductivity
(S cm1)
2.22  105  6  107 (at
130 C, r ¼ 0.15)
5.4  104  2  105
(at 130 C, r ¼ 0.10)
5.1  108  5  109
(at 120 C, r ¼ 0.15)
9.6  105  6  106
(at 130 C, r ¼ 0.10)
Max electronic conductivity
(S cm1)
7.47  103  3  105 (at
70 C, r ¼ 0.05)
3.60  105  2  107
(at 50 C, r ¼ 0.01)
4.63  106  2  108
(at 40 C, r ¼ 0.15)
5.23  107  4  109
(at 40 C, r ¼ 0.05)
J. Mater. Chem. A
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Paper
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE) Resource (NSF
ECCS-1542205), anode of the National Science Foundation's
National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure. This
work made use of the shared facilities at the University of
Chicago Materials Research Science and Engineering Center,
supported
by National
Science
Foundation
under award
number DMR-2011854. This research used resources of the
National Synchrotron Light Source II, a U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) Oﬃce of Science User Facility operated for the
DOE Oﬃce of Science by Brookhaven National Laboratory
under Contract No. DE-SC0012704.
References
1 A.
Giovannitti,
D.-T.
Sbircea,
S.
Inal,
C.
B.
Nielsen,
E. Bandiello, D. A. Hani, M. Sessolo, G. G. Malliaras,
I. McCulloch and J. Rivnay, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.,
2016, 113, 12017–12022.
2 S. Wustoni, T. C. Hidalgo, A. Hama, D. Ohayon, A. Savva,
N. Wei, N. Wehbe and S. Inal, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5,
1900943.
3 A. Savva, S. Wustoni and S. Inal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6,
12023–12030.
4 A. M. Pappa, D. Ohayon, A. Giovannitti, I. P. Maria, A. Savva,
I. Uguz, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, R. M. Owens and S. Inal, Sci.
Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0911.
5 H. Zhao, B. Zhu, J. Sekine, S.-C. Luo and H. Yu, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 680–686.
6 B. Kim, J. Un Hwang and E. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020,
13, 859–867.
7 P. Han, S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Energy Storage
Mater., 2019, 17, 317–324.
8 S. T. Keene, C. Lubrano, S. Kazemzadeh, A. Melianas,
Y. Tuchman, G. Polino, P. Scognamiglio, L. Cin`a, A. Salleo,
Y. van de Burgt and F. Santoro, Nat. Mater., 2020, 1–5.
9 J. Stejskal, O. E. Bogomolova, N. V. Blinova, M. Trchov´a,
I. ˇSedˇenkov´a, J. Prokeˇs and I. Sapurina, Polym. Int., 2009,
58, 872–879.
10 C. H. W. Cheng, F. Lin and M. C. Lonergan, J. Phys. Chem. B,
2005, 109, 10168–10178.
11 S.
Inal,
J.
Rivnay,
P.
Leleux,
M.
Ferro,
M.
Ramuz,
J.
C.
Brendel,
M.
M.
Schmidt,
M.
Thelakkat
and
G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7450–7455.
12 A. Pipertzis, M. M¨uhlinghaus, M. Mezger, U. Scherf and
G. Floudas, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6400–6450.
13 S. Inal, G. G. Malliaras and J. Rivnay, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8,
1767.
14 A.
Giovannitti,
C.
B.
Nielsen,
D.-T.
Sbircea,
S.
Inal,
M. Donahue, M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hani, A. Amassian,
G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun.,
2016, 7, 13066.
15 B.
X.
Dong,
C.
Nowak,
J.
W.
Onorato,
J.
Strzalka,
F.
A.
Escobedo,
C.
K.
Luscombe,
P.
F.
Nealey
and
S. N. Patel, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1418–1429.
16 A. Giovannitti, I. P. Maria, D. Hani, M. J. Donahue,
D. Bryant, K. J. Barth, B. E. Makdah, A. Savva, D. Moia,
M. Zetek, P. R. F. Barnes, O. G. Reid, S. Inal, G. Rumbles,
G. G. Malliaras, J. Nelson, J. Rivnay and I. McCulloch,
Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2945–2953.
17 B. Meng, H. Song, X. Chen, Z. Xie, J. Liu and L. Wang,
Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 4357–4363.
18 B. Meng, J. Liu and L. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 1261–
1270.
19 P. Schmode, A. Savva, R. Kahl, D. Ohayon, F. Meichsner,
O. Dolynchuk, T. Thurn-Albrecht, S. Inal and M. Thelakkat,
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13029–13039.
20 D. Ohayon, A. Savva, W. Du, B. D. Paulsen, I. Uguz,
R. S. Ashraf, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch and S. Inal, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4253–4266.
21 D. Neˇcas and P. Klapetek, Cent. Eur. J. Phys., 2012, 10, 181–
188.
22 F. Zhang, J. Ilavsky, G. G. Long, J. P. G. Quintana, A. J. Allen
and P. R. Jemian, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 2010, 41, 1151–
1158.
23 J. Ilavsky, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2012, 45, 324–328.
24 D. Sharon, P. Bennington, C. Liu, Y. Kambe, B. X. Dong,
V. F. Burnett, M. Dolejsi, G. Grocke, S. N. Patel and
P. F. Nealey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, H1028.
25 B. X. Dong, Z. Liu, M. Misra, J. Strzalka, J. Niklas,
O. G. Poluektov, F. A. Escobedo, C. K. Ober, P. F. Nealey
and S. N. Patel, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7665–7675.
26 G. M. Torrie and J. P. Valleau, J. Comput. Phys., 1977, 23, 187–
199.
27 A. de Izarra, C. Choi, Y. H. Jang and Y. Lansac, J. Phys. Chem.
B, 2021, 125, 1916–1923.
28 J.-F. Chang, B. Sun, D. W. Breiby, M. M. Nielsen, T. I. S¨olling,
M. Giles, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater.,
2004, 16, 4772–4776.
29 J. Y. Na, M. Kim and Y. D. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121,
13930–13937.
30 L. Farouil, F. Alary, E. Bedel-Pereira and J.-L. Heully, J. Phys.
Chem. A, 2018, 122, 6532–6545.
31 N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7069–
7163.
32 K. Rahimi, I. Botiz, J. O. Agumba, S. Motamen, N. Stingelin
and G. Reiter, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11121–11123.
33 C. R. Snyder, R. C. Nieuwendaal, D. M. DeLongchamp,
C. K. Luscombe, P. Sista and S. D. Boyd, Macromolecules,
2014, 47, 3942–3950.
34 M. J. Marczewski, B. Stanje, I. Hanzu, M. Wilkening and
P. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12341–
12349.
35 Z. Qian, L. Galuska, W. W. McNutt, M. U. Ocheje, Y. He,
Z. Cao, S. Zhang, J. Xu, K. Hong, R. B. Goodman,
S. Rondeau-Gagn´e, J. Mei and X. Gu, J. Polym. Sci., Part B:
Polym. Phys., 2019, 57, 1635–1644.
36 S. E. Root, M. A. Alkhadra, D. Rodriquez, A. D. Printz and
D. J. Lipomi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2646–2654.
37 L. Q. Flagg, C. G. Bischak, J. W. Onorato, R. B. Rashid,
C. K. Luscombe and D. S. Ginger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019,
141, 4345–4354.
38 R. Giridharagopal, L. Q. Flagg, J. S. Harrison, M. E. Ziﬀer,
J. Onorato, C. K. Luscombe and D. S. Ginger, Nat. Mater.,
2017, 16, 737–742.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
J. Mater. Chem. A
Paper
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

39 A. Savva, C. Cendra, A. Giugni, B. Torre, J. Surgailis,
D. Ohayon, A. Giovannitti, I. McCulloch, E. Di Fabrizio,
A. Salleo, J. Rivnay and S. Inal, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31,
927–937.
40 W. Liu, L. M¨uller, S. Ma, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder,
W. Kowalsky, A. K¨ohn and R. Lovrincic, J. Phys. Chem. C,
2018, 122, 27983–27990.
41 H.-H. Liao, C.-M. Yang, C.-C. Liu, S.-F. Horng, H.-F. Meng
and J.-T. Shy, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 104506.
42 M. L. Chabinyc, R. A. Street and J. E. Northrup, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 2007, 90, 123508.
43 A. Abate, T. Leijtens, S. Pathak, J. Teuscher, R. Avolio,
M. E. Errico, J. Kirkpatrik, J. M. Ball, P. Docampo,
I. McPherson and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.,
2013, 15, 2572–2579.
44 S. N. Patel, A. E. Javier, G. M. Stone, S. A. Mullin and
N. P. Balsara, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1589–1600.
45 Y. Harima, X. Jiang, Y. Kunugi, K. Yamashita, A. Naka,
K. K. Lee and M. Ishikawa, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1298–
1305.
46 D. Mombr´u, M. Romero, R. Faccio and ´A. W. Mombr´u, J.
Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(13), 7061–7070.
47 M. S. A. Abdou, F. P. Orno, Y. Son and S. Holdcro, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 4518–4524.
48 S. A. Mollinger, B. A. Krajina, R. Noriega, A. Salleo and
A. J. Spakowitz, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 708–712.
49 K. Gu and Y.-L. Loo, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2019,
57, 1559–1571.
50 M. Digar, S. L. Hung, H. L. Wang, T. C. Wen and A. Gopalan,
Polymer, 2002, 43, 681–691.
51 S. Seki, Md. A. B. H. Susan, T. Kaneko, H. Tokuda, A. Noda
and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3886–3892.
52 A. Nishimoto, K. Agehara, N. Furuya, T. Watanabe and
M. Watanabe, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 1541–1548.
J. Mater. Chem. A
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Paper
Published on 31 August 2021. Downloaded by University of Chicago on 9/12/2021 8:50:37 PM. 
View Article Online

